Rivera, Sylvia and Marsha P. Johnson. *Street Transvestite Action Revolutionaries: Survival, Revolt and Queer Antagonist Struggle*, edited by Ehn Nothing. Untorelli Press, 2013: [external link](https://transreads.org/wp-content/uploads/2019/03/2019-03-17_5c8dc8507f026_STARcopy.pdf)
# Street Transvestite Action Revolutionaries: Survival, Revolt and Queer Antagonist Struggle
## Introduction: Queens Against Society (p. 3-11)
*by Ehn Nothing*
- "It seems obvious that the study of history is a necessary element of continued wat against the present world. There are tools lying in every failed insurrection, every temporarily-established zone of free play, every campaign of sabotage that ended in a jail cell or shootout. To ignore these lessons is to forfeit valuable weaponry and strategic insight. History is a weapon.
  
  Additionally, creating a narrative of revolt against the constraints of civilizations gives us a lineage to draw motivation from, to keep us warm when we feel broken under the weight of this miserable world. By understanding ourselves as part of an ongoing war that has been raging for 12,000 years, we dynamite a history that would keep us as either spectators or pawns in a theater created by bosses, politicians, and police. History is a compass" (3)
- "As individuals who would like to see the entire tradition of managed revolution go up in flames, it is not for us to establish the dead as heroic martyrs, but rather to understand them as individuals like us, exemplary in the context of pacified contentment, but flawed nonetheless. To "honor our dead," then, cannot take the form it takes for the religious purists (whether they be Catholic or Leninist in nature), but can only exist as sustained attack against society and the proliferation of spaces and relationships from which that attack can be realized." (3)
- "Underlying these attacks is an ecology of revolt that extends far beyond any specific smashed window, glued lock, or torched police car. Our relationships of support, our solidarity with imprisoned comrades, our criminal intimacies, our squats, our syntheses of survival and attack are the materials from which our insurrectional practice springs forth." (3)
- "It is with this in mind that I wish to critically engage with STAR (Street Transvestite Action Revolutionaries) and its activities in the post-Stonewall gay liberation movement... the failures and limits of STAR are of more interest to me than mythologized stories of Sylvia Rivera throwing shoes or bricks or Molotov cocktails at police during the Stonewall riots. I hope to engage STAR as a historical weapon and as a precedent of contemporary queer insurrectional projects." (3-4)
- "...the lack of critical engagement or archiving of gay street culture and the self-organized networks that existed within it makes material hard to come by. So while much of the wider current that made ruptures like the Stonewall and Compton's Cafeteria riot possible has been lost to history or remains uninvestigated and unarchived, STAR exists as a relatively well-documented example of street queens' resistance." (4)
- "However, my approach to STAR is not in service of protecting or reinforcing any ideology... my goal is to draw out currents within STAR's praxis and relate them to a project insurrection, allowing Marsha and Sylvia to speak for themselves and refusing to situate STAR within frameworks, such as anarchism, that I identify with...
  
  In the following essay, I draw out particular attitudes, positions, and issues embodied in STAR and the culture of gay liberation that they fought in: conflict with the white gat left, street-level survival, self-defense, anti-police and anti-prison politics, direct action, and anti-assimilationist queerness." (5)
## Assimilationist Amnesia, Identity Insomnia
- "The resistance that STAR faced as a multi-racial group of revolutionary street queens illuminates the wider dynamics of the gay liberation movement, and allows us to understand the foundation upon which the current white supremacist, cissexist, middle-class gay assimilationist movement is built upon." (5)
- "After the initial rupture of Stonewall... the gay liberation movement had to deal with uppity street queens who rejected abstract politics in favor of street-level concerns. Those with nothing to lose are often those who push hardest when the time comes; this was true at the Stonewall riots, and continued into the gay liberation movement, much to the dismay of those whose idea of "gay liberation" was either inclusion in straight society or managed revolution. These forces of gay normativity and revolutionary management marginalized, erased, and silenced those whose bodies, histories, or ethical orientations refused dominant models." (6)
- "This selective history has also been reconfigured and replicated by the burgeoning transgender movement... seeking the same inclusion of transgender individuals into white capitalist society that the GAA assimilations sought in the 1970s...
  
  This erasure of the complexities of Sylvia and Marsha's lives is one example in an ongoing white supremacist, colonialist project taken up by transgender activists, who wish to subsume all variations from Western binary gen der under the umbrella of "transgender," regardless of the origins of the term of the self-understanding of gender-variant people. This flattening of complex experiences also allows for transgender individuals who are white, middle or upper class, assimilationist, or institutionally educated to appropriate the experiences and struggles of radical gender-variant people of color as part of a grand narrative of "transgender," thereby separating themselves from any responsibility to engage and attack systems of oppression outside of the vague "transphobia."" (7)
### Feminist & Assimilationist Betrayal
- "While both Sylvia and Marsha noted respectful treatment by lesbians situationally (see the interview with Marsha in this zine and Duberman's Stonewall), the growing tide of radical feminism and lesbian separatism played out violently against STAR, specifically at the 1973 Christopher Street Liberation Day rally in Washington Square Park. Blocked from speaking and physically attacked by lesbian feminists for parodying womanhood, Sylvia stormed onto the stage, grabbed the mic, and confronted the audience for its whiteness, class privilege, and lack of concern for prisoners. As Sylvia describes it: "I had to battle my way up on stage, and literally get beaten up and punched around by people I thought were my comrades, to get to that microphone. I got to the microphone and I said my piece." The betrayal, led by lesbian-feminist Jean O'Leary, caused Sylvia to drop out of the movement for decades and attempt suicide." (7-8)
- "With the dropping of transvestites from the New York antidiscrimination bill... the gay liberation movement turned toward assimilation and reform and began to distance itself from revolutionaries, street people, queers of color, and gender-variant individuals." (8)
## Street Survival
- "From the beginning, STAR's concerns were not for sloganeering, posturing, masturbatory intellectualism, or "movement building." Survival, as both an attempt to provide for basic needs of living and as a tension toward self-defense and offensive struggle against a society that threatened them, was central to all of STAR's activities..." (8)
- "Stonewall, like the Compton's Cafeteria riot before it, was only possible because of pre-existing conflictual zones -- metropolitan neighborhoods "where social tolerance for sexual difference was high and police interference with neighborhood life was lax or nonexistent" and in which queers shared money from hustling, food, housing, self-defense, and tricks of the trade. STAR, therefore, should be seen as one particularly visible manifestation of a wider network of self-organiozation among street queens and poor queer people. Their true origins, then, are not necessarily "political" in nature, but rooted in an informal type of solidarity and mutual aid, often linked to criminality and hatred for the police." (8-9)
- "STAR as an organization came out of the occupation of NYU's Weinstein Hall in 1970. The university had refused to allow gay dances, organized by a gay student group, to occur on campus, so gay liberationists occupied the hall and held a sit-in. The arrival of the Tactical Police Force caused the gay liberationists to abandon the occupation. STAR, initially called Street Transvestites for Gay Power, was born of the frustration with the gay liberation movement for its refusal to defend itself and be committed to struggle against the police (see STAR NYU statement in this zine)." (9)
- "Sylvia and Marsha -- who, in a common practice amongst street queens and queer sex workers, had secretly turned hotel rooms into temporary communal living spaces, sometimes for 50 or more people (Feinberg) -- began work on self-organizing spaces and projects to provide for their needs and those of other street kids. Prior to the formation of STAR House, Sylvia and Marsha had a trailer truck in a parking lot in Greenwich Village, housing two dozen street kids. This was short lived, as Sylvia and Marsha came home one day with food for the kids, only to discover that their home was driving away, with 20 kids still sleeping in it. (Duberman) Then they formed STAR House: "We fed people and clothed people. We kept the building going. We went out and hustled the streets. We paid the rent. We didn't want the kids out in the streets hustling. They would go out and rip off food. There was always food in the house and everyone had fun" (Feinberg). This living situation proved to be temporary, and they were evicted for not paying rent." (9)
- "With the members of STAR in precarious living situations, STAR had difficulty actualizing its planned projects, which included dance fundraisers, another STAR home, a telephone line, a recreation center, a bail fund for arrested queens, and a lawyer for queer people in jail (see Marsha interview)." (9)
- "Equally important to establishing living situations and securing food was the need for self-defense against bashers and police. The generalized sharing of skills amongst queer street kids and sex workers focused heavily on discerning what situations were safe and which weren't, and protecting each other from police... In jail, gender-variant prisoners faced rape and abuse by police and inmates, and legal manipulation that caused some queens to have to wait years to get a court date. It is no surprise then, that STAR originated in the frustration with gay liberationists' failure to confront police at NYU; that STAR's first public appearance was at a Young Lords demonstration against police repression (Feinberg); that Sylvia's impassioned 1973 speech indicted the gay liberation and women's movements for forgetting its prisoners of war..." (8-9)
- "...upon reentering gay struggle in the 90s, Sylvia focused on police violence against Amadou Diallo and Abner Louima, in addition to the murders of Matthew Shepard and Amanda Milan. Sylvia's attitudes on the police are clear: "We always felt that the police were the real enemy. We expected nothing better than to be treated like we were animals - and we were." (see Feinberg's interview with Sylvia)" (9)
## Conclusion
- "For queer insurgents, then, recovering our history from obscurity and recuperation is a necessary element of struggle. If we do not critically engage this history, we not only lose analytical tools that could aid the spread and sharpening of our revolt, but also abandon the dead to vultures who reduce everything to image and commodity." (10)
- "...gay pacifism is not merely the result of gays and lesbians seeing their revolution come to be via gay marriage and hate crime legislation; it is an attempt by newly-integrated bosses and police to prevent revolt in their ranks. Our war, then, is against the gay defenders of society as much as it is against the straight ones." (10)
- "For those of us whom through our ethical inclination toward insurrection, have come into conflict with these perennial enemies, the distinction is clear. Glitter is not a basis for affinity. We prefer to forge our friendships in a shared practice of revolt, because we can only truly know each other when we cease to be servile, that is, when we are destructive together." (10-11)
## Works Referenced
- Duberman, Martin. *Stonewall: The definitive story of the LGBTAQ rights uprising that changed America*. Penguin, 2019.
- Feinberg, Leslie. "Street Transvestite Action Revolutionaries." Workers World. September 24, 2006: [external link](http://www.workers.org/2006/us/lavender-red-73)
- Friedman, Mack. "Queens, Hookers, and Hustlers: Organizing for Survival and Revolt Amongst Gender-Variant Sex Workers, 1950-1970": http://zinelibrary.info/files/queenshookershustlers_read.pdf
- Gan, Jessi. "Still at the back of the bus': Sylvia Rivera's struggle." *CENTRO: Journal for the Center for Puerto Rican Studies* **19**, no. 1 (2007), 124+: [external link](https://transreads.org/wp-content/uploads/2019/03/2019-03-20_5c91dd8e0c2a2_SylviaRiverainterview.pdf)
- Highleyman, Liz. "Sylvia Rivera: A Woman Before Her Time" in Smash the Church, Smash the State: The Early Years of Gay Liberation.
- Wilchins, Riki. "A Woman for Her Time": http://www.villagevoice.com/2002-02-26/news/a-woman-for-her-time
# Tags
#/1970 #/1973 #/2013 #AbnerLouima #abolition-police #abolition-prison #AmadouDiallo #AmandaMilan #CW-suicide #ChristopherStreetLiberationDay #ComptonCafeteria #EhnNothing #GAA #GLF #gay-assimilation #GayActivistAlliance #GayLiberationFront #homonormativity #MarshaJohnson #MatthewShepard #mutualaid #neoliberalism-queerassimilation #prison-industrialcomplex #queer-history #STAR #StreetTransvestiteActionRevolutionaries #SylviaRivera #UntorelliPress #YoungLords

#unfinished-references