McKay, Matthew, Jeffrey C. Wood, and Jeffrey Brantley. *The Dialectical Behavior Therapy Skills Workbook.* New Harbinger Publications, Inc., 2007. 5th edition.
<h1><center><b> Chapter 3: Basic Mindfulness Skills</b> (p. 63-83)</h1></center>
*An operational working definition of mindfulness is: the awareness that emerges through paying attention on purpose, in the present moment, and nonjudgmentally to the unfolding of experience moment by moment.*
- Jon Kabat-Zinn (2003)
## Mindfulness Skills: What Are They? (p. 63-65)
*Mindfulness*, also known as meditation, is a valuable skill that has been taught for thousands of years in many of the world's religions, including Christianity (Merton, 1960), Judaism (Pinson, 2004), Buddhism (Rahula, 1974), and Islam (Inayat Khan, 2000). Beginning in the 1980s, Jon Kabat-Zinn began using nonreligious mindfulness skills to help hospital patients cope with chronic pain problems (Kabat-Zinn, 1982; Kabat-Zinn, Lipworth, & Burney, 1985; Kabat-Zinn, Lipworth, Burney, & Sellers, 1987). More recently, similar mindfulness techniques were also integrated into other forms of psychotherapy (Segal, Williams, & Teasdale, 2002), including dialectical behavior therapy (Linehan, 1993a). Studies have shown mindfulness skills to be effective at reducing the odds of having another major depressive episode (Teasdale et al., 2000); reducing symptoms of anxiety (Kabat-Zinn et al., 1992); reducing chronic pain (Kabat-Zinn et al., 1985; Kabat-Zinn et al., 1987); decreasing binge eating (Kristeller & Hallett, 1999); increasing tolerance of distressing situations; increasing relaxation; and increasing skills to cope with difficult situations (Baer, 2003). As a result of findings like these, mindfulness is considered one of the most important *core skills* in dialectical behavior therapy (Linehan, 1993a).

So what exactly is mindfulness? One definition is offered above by the mindfulness researcher Jon Kabat-Zinn. But for the purposes of this book, mindfulness is *the ability to be aware of your thoughts, emotions, physical sensations, and actions - in the present moment - without judging or criticizing yourself or your experience.*

Have you ever heard the expressions "be in the moment" or "be here now"? These are both different ways of saying: "be mindful of what's happening to you." But this isn't always an easy task. At any moment in time, you might be thinking, feeling, sensing, and doing many different things. For example, consider what's happening to you right now. You're probably sitting somewhere, reading these words. But at the same time, you're also breathing, listening to the sounds around you, noticing what the book feels like, noticing the weight of your body resting in the chair, and maybe you're even thinking about something else. It's also possible that you're aware of your emotional and physical states of being happy, sad, tired, or excited. Maybe you're even aware of bodily sensations, such as your heart beating or the rising and falling of your chest as you breathe. You might even be doing something that you're completely unaware of, like shaking your leg, humming, or resting your head in your hand. That's a lot to be aware of, and right now, you're just reading a book. Imagine what's happening to you when you're doing other things in your life, like talking with someone or dealing with people at work. The truth is, no one is 100 percent mindful all the time. But the more mindful you learn to be, the more control you will gain over your life.

But remember, time never stands still and each second of your life is different. Because of this, it's important that you learn to be aware "in each present moment." For example, by the time you finish reading this sentence, the moment that you started reading it is gone and your present moment is now different. In fact, *you* are now different. The cells in your body are constantly dying and being replaced, so physically you're different. Equally important, your thoughts, feelings, sensations, and actions are never exactly the same in every situation, so they're different too. For these reasons, it's important that you learn to be mindful of how your experience changes in each individual moment of your life.

And lastly, in order to be fully aware of your experiences in the present moment, it's necessary that you do so without criticizing yourself, your situation, or other people. In dialectical behavior therapy this is called radical acceptance (Linehan, 1993a). As described in chapter 2, radical acceptance means tolerating something without judging it or trying to change it. This is important because if you're judging yourself, your experience, or someone else in the present moment, then you're not really paying attention to what's happening in that moment. For example, many people spend a lot of time worrying about mistakes they've made in the past or worrying about mistakes that they might make in the future. But while they're doing this, their focus is no longer on what's happening to them *now*; their thoughts are somewhere else. As a result, they live in a painful past or future, and life feels very difficult.

So to review, mindfulness is the ability of be aware of your thoughts, emotions, physical sensations, and actions - in the present moment - without judging or criticizing yourself or your experience.
## A "Mindless" Exercise (p. 65-66)
## Why Are Mindfulness Skills Important? (p. 66)
## About This Chapter (p. 66-67)

# Tags
#/2007 #AnnOMassion #anxiety #bingeeating #BrendanHallett #chronicpain #copingtools #DBT #DBT-exercise #DBTgreenbook #DBTworkbook #depression #DovberPinson #eatingdisorder #exteroception #genre-self-help #interoception #JMarkGWilliams #JeanLKristeller #JeffreyBrantley #JeffreyCWood #JohnDTeasdale #JonKabat-Zinn #JudithMSoulsby #KennethEFletcher #LeslieLipworth #LindaGayPeterson #list #LoriPbert #MarkALau #MarshaMLinehan #MatthewMcKay #meditation #mentalhealth #MichaelCGemar #mindfulness #painmanagement #PirVilayatInayatKhan #radicalacceptance #RobertBurney #RuthABaer #SakiFSantorelli #self-regulation #self-soothing #sensoryawareness #ThomasMerton #ValerieARidgeway #WSellers #WalpolaRahula #WilliamRLenderking #ZindelVSegal

#unfinished-notes
# Standard Tags
#/2007 #copingtools #DBT #DBT-exercise #DBTgreenbook #DBTworkbook #exteroception #genre-self-help #interoception #JeffreyBrantley #JeffreyCWood #MatthewMcKay #meditation  #mentalhealth #mindfulness #radicalacceptance #self-regulation #self-soothing #sensoryawareness 

#unfinished-notes
# Tag Bank
#AUD #addiction #affirmations #anatomy #angermanagement #anxiety #bingeeating #chronicpain #cosmology #crying #cutting #DBT-breathing #DBT-visualization #depression #distresstolerance #eatingdisorder #endorphins #ethics #grounding #isolation #meditation-safeplace #mentalhealth-self-talk #musclerelaxation #overhwelmingemotions #painmanagement #pleasurableactivities #resilience #self-harm #spirituality #substanceuse #substanceuse-alcohol #suicidality

#ARMurrell #AnnOMassion #BrendanHallett #DovberPinson #JCOlerud #JMarkGWilliams #JeanLKristeller #JohnDTeasdale #JonKabat-Zinn #JudithMSoulsby #KGWilson #KennethEFletcher #LeslieLipworth #LindaGayPeterson #LoriPbert #MarkALau #MarshaMLinehan #MichaelCGemar #PirVilayatInayatKhan #RobertBurney #RuthABaer #SakiFSantorelli #theGrandCanyon #ThomasMerton #ValerieARidgeway #WSellers #WalpolaRahula #WilliamRLenderking #ZindelVSegal

#CW-abuse #CW-self-harm #CW-substanceabuse #CW-substancemisuse #CW-suicide

#tone-instructional #tone-motivational #tone-self-help

#list #questionnaire #worksheet