McKay, Matthew, Jeffrey C. Wood, and Jeffrey Brantley. *The Dialectical Behavior Therapy Skills Workbook.* New Harbinger Publications, Inc., 2007. 5th edition.
<h1><center><b> Chapter 3: Basic Mindfulness Skills</b> (p. 63-83)</h1></center>
*An operational working definition of mindfulness is: the awareness that emerges through paying attention on purpose, in the present moment, and nonjudgmentally to the unfolding of experience moment by moment.*
- Jon Kabat-Zinn (2003)
## Mindfulness Skills: What Are They? (p. 63-65)
*Mindfulness*, also known as meditation, is a valuable skill that has been taught for thousands of years in many of the world's religions, including Christianity (Merton, 1960), Judaism (Pinson, 2004), Buddhism (Rahula, 1974), and Islam (Inayat Khan, 2000). Beginning in the 1980s, Jon Kabat-Zinn began using nonreligious mindfulness skills to help hospital patients cope with chronic pain problems (Kabat-Zinn, 1982; Kabat-Zinn, Lipworth, & Burney, 1985; Kabat-Zinn, Lipworth, Burney, & Sellers, 1987). More recently, similar mindfulness techniques were also integrated into other forms of psychotherapy (Segal, Williams, & Teasdale, 2002), including dialectical behavior therapy (Linehan, 1993a). Studies have shown mindfulness skills to be effective at reducing the odds of having another major depressive episode (Teasdale et al., 2000); reducing symptoms of anxiety (Kabat-Zinn et al., 1992); reducing chronic pain (Kabat-Zinn et al., 1985; Kabat-Zinn et al., 1987); decreasing binge eating (Kristeller & Hallett, 1999); increasing tolerance of distressing situations; increasing relaxation; and increasing skills to cope with difficult situations (Baer, 2003). As a result of findings like these, mindfulness is considered one of the most important *core skills* in dialectical behavior therapy (Linehan, 1993a).

So what exactly is mindfulness? One definition is offered above by the mindfulness researcher Jon Kabat-Zinn. But for the purposes of this book, mindfulness is *the ability to be aware of your thoughts, emotions, physical sensations, and actions - in the present moment - without judging or criticizing yourself or your experience.*

Have you ever heard the expressions "be in the moment" or "be here now"? These are both different ways of saying: "be mindful of what's happening to you." But this isn't always an easy task. At any moment in time, you might be thinking, feeling, sensing, and doing many different things. For example, consider what's happening to you right now. You're probably sitting somewhere, reading these words. But at the same time, you're also breathing, listening to the sounds around you, noticing what the book feels like, noticing the weight of your body resting in the chair, and maybe you're even thinking about something else. It's also possible that you're aware of your emotional and physical states of being happy, sad, tired, or excited. Maybe you're even aware of bodily sensations, such as your heart beating or the rising and falling of your chest as you breathe. You might even be doing something that you're completely unaware of, like shaking your leg, humming, or resting your head in your hand. That's a lot to be aware of, and right now, you're just reading a book. Imagine what's happening to you when you're doing other things in your life, like talking with someone or dealing with people at work. The truth is, no one is 100 percent mindful all the time. But the more mindful you learn to be, the more control you will gain over your life.

But remember, time never stands still and each second of your life is different. Because of this, it's important that you learn to be aware "in each present moment." For example, by the time you finish reading this sentence, the moment that you started reading it is gone and your present moment is now different. In fact, *you* are now different. The cells in your body are constantly dying and being replaced, so physically you're different. Equally important, your thoughts, feelings, sensations, and actions are never exactly the same in every situation, so they're different too. For these reasons, it's important that you learn to be mindful of how your experience changes in each individual moment of your life.

And lastly, in order to be fully aware of your experiences in the present moment, it's necessary that you do so without criticizing yourself, your situation, or other people. In dialectical behavior therapy this is called radical acceptance (Linehan, 1993a). As described in chapter 2, radical acceptance means tolerating something without judging it or trying to change it. This is important because if you're judging yourself, your experience, or someone else in the present moment, then you're not really paying attention to what's happening in that moment. For example, many people spend a lot of time worrying about mistakes they've made in the past or worrying about mistakes that they might make in the future. But while they're doing this, their focus is no longer on what's happening to them *now*; their thoughts are somewhere else. As a result, they live in a painful past or future, and life feels very difficult.

So to review, mindfulness is the ability of be aware of your thoughts, emotions, physical sensations, and actions - in the present moment - without judging or criticizing yourself or your experience.
## A "Mindless" Exercise (p. 65-66)
Obviously, mindfulness is a skill that requires practice.  Most people get distracted, "zone out", or spend most of their daily lives being unmindful or running on autopilot. As a result, they then get lost, anxious, and frustrated when a situation doesn't happen as they expect it to. Here are some common ways in which all of us have experienced being unmindful. Check the ones that you've done: 
- [ ] While driving or traveling, you don't remember the experience or which roads you took.
- [ ] While having a conversation, you suddenly realize that yo don't know what the other person is talking about.
- [ ] While having a conversation, you're already thinking about what you're going to say next before the other person has even stopped speaking.
- [ ] While reading, you suddenly realize that you've been thinking about something else and have no idea what you just read.
- [ ] While walking into a room, you suddenly forget what you came to get.
- [ ] After putting something down, you can't remember where you just put it.
- [ ] While taking a shower, you're already planning what you have to do later and then you forget if you've already washed your hair or some other body part.
- [ ] While having sex, you're thinking about other things or other people.

All of these examples are fairly harmless. But for people with overwhelming emotions, being unmindful can often have a devastating effect on their lives. Consider the example of Lee. Lee thought that everyone at work hated him. One day, a new employee who Lee found attractive approached him in the cafeteria and asked to sit down. The woman tried to be friendly and make conversation, but Lee was more engaged in the conversation in his own head than he was in the one with the woman.

"She's probably just stuck up like the rest of them," he thought. "Why would someone like her be interested in me anyway? Why would she want to sit with me? It's probably just a joke someone else put her up to." From the moment the woman sat down and tried to talk with him, Lee just became angrier and more suspicious.

The woman did her best to make small talk. She asked Lee how he like working at the company, how long he'd been there, and she even asked him about the weather, but Lee never noticed. He was so wrapped up in his own conversation, and in paying attention to his own self-critical thoughts, that he never recognized that the woman was trying to be friendly.

After five minutes of unsuccessfully trying, the woman finally stopped talking to Lee. Then a few minutes later, she moved to a different table, and when she did, Lee congratulated himself. "I knew it," he thought, "I knew she wasn't really interested in me." But at the expense of being right, Lee's unmindfulness and self-criticism had cost him another opportunity to meet a potential friend.
## Why Are Mindfulness Skills Important? (p. 66)
Now that you have a better idea of what mindfulness is - and isn't - it's probably easy to see why this skill is so important. but for the purposes of this workbook, let's be very clear about why you need to learn mindfulness skills. There are three reasons:
1. Mindfulness skills will help you focus on one thing at a time in the present moment, and by doing this you can better control and soothe your overwhelming emotions.]
2. Mindfulness will help you learn to identify and separate judgmental thoughts from your experiences. These judgmental thoughts often fuel your overwhelming emotions.
3. Mindfulness will help you develop a skill that's very important in dialectical behavior therapy called *wise mind* (Linehan, 1993a).

Wise mind is the ability to make healthy decisions about your life based on both your rational thoughts and your emotions. For example, you've probably noticed that it's often difficult - or impossible - to make good decisions when your *emotions* are intense, out of control, or contradict what's rational. Similarly, it's difficult to make informed decisions when your *thoughts* are intense, irrational, or contradict how you feel. Wise mind is a decision-making process that balances the reasoning of your thoughts with the needs of your emotions, and it is a skill that will be discussed further in chapter 4.
## About This Chapter (p. 66-67)
Throughout this chapter and the next, you'll be presented with exercises to help you become more mindful of your moment-to-moment experiences. This chapter will introduce you to beginning mindfulness exercises to help you observe and describe your thoughts and emotions more carefully. In dialectical behavior therapy, these are called "what" skills (Linehan, 1993b), meaning they'll help you become mindful of *what* you're focusing on. Then in the next chapter, you'll be taught more advanced mindfulness skills. In dialectical behavior therapy, these are called "how" skills (Linehan, 1993b), meaning they'll help you learn *how* to be both mindful and nonjudgmental in your daily experiences.

The exercises in this chapter will teach you four "what" skills:
1. To focus more fully on the present moment
2. To recognize and focus on your thoughts, emotions, and physical sensations
3. To focus on your moment-to-moment stream of awareness
4. To separate your thoughts from your emotions and physical sensations

As you read the following exercises, it's important that you practice them in the order in which they're presented. The exercises in this chapter are grouped according to the four "what" skills, and each exercise builds on the previous exercise.
# Tags
#/2007 #AnnOMassion #anxiety #bingeeating #BrendanHallett #chronicpain #copingtools #DBT #DBT-exercise #DBTgreenbook #DBTworkbook #depression #DovberPinson #eatingdisorder #exteroception #genre-self-help #interoception #JMarkGWilliams #JeanLKristeller #JeffreyBrantley #JeffreyCWood #JohnDTeasdale #JonKabat-Zinn #JudithMSoulsby #KennethEFletcher #LeslieLipworth #LindaGayPeterson #list #LoriPbert #MarkALau #MarshaMLinehan #MatthewMcKay #meditation #mentalhealth #mentalhealth-self-talk #MichaelCGemar #mindfulness #painmanagement #PirVilayatInayatKhan #radicalacceptance #RobertBurney #RuthABaer #SakiFSantorelli #self-regulation #self-soothing #sensoryawareness #spirituality #ThomasMerton #ValerieARidgeway #WSellers #WalpolaRahula #WilliamRLenderking #wisemind #ZindelVSegal