Otto-Moudry, Reade, Linda M Kinney, Rebecca L Butcher, Gaines Blasdel, Lee K Brown, Glyn Elwyn, Jeremy B Myers, John H Turco, John F Nigriny, and Rachel A Moses. "Exploring Decisional Conflict Experienced by Individuals Considering Metoidioplasty and Phalloplasty Gender-affirming Surgery." *Plastic and Reconstructive Surgery Global Open* **12**, no. 5 (2024): [external link](https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC11139465/)
# Exploring Decisional Conflict Experienced by Individuals Considering Metoidioplasty and Phalloplasty Gender-affirming Surgery
## Abstract
### Background
"Metoidioplasty and phalloplasty gender-affirming surgery (MaPGAS) is increasingly performed and requires patients to make complex decisions that may lead to decisional uncertainty. This study aimed to evaluate decisional conflict in individuals considering MaPGAS."
### Methods
"We administered a cross-sectional survey to adult participants assigned female sex at birth and considering MaPGAS, recruited via social media platforms and community health centers. We collected data on demographics, medical and surgical history, MaPGAS type considered, and the Decisional Conflict Scale (DCS). DCS scores range from 0 to 100 (>37.5 indicates greater decisional conflict). Demographic characteristics and DCS scores were compared between subgroups, using descriptive and chi-square statistics. Participants commented on MaPGAS uncertainty, and their comments were evaluated and thematically analyzed."
### Results
"Responses from 264 participants were analyzed: mean age 29 years; 64% (n = 168) trans men, 80% (n = 210) White, 78% (n = 206) nonrural, 45% (n = 120) privately insured, 56% (n = 148) had 4 or more years of college, 23% (n = 84) considering metoidioplasty, 24% (n = 87) considering phalloplasty, and 26% (n = 93) considering metoidioplasty and phalloplasty. DCS total scores were significantly higher (39.8; P < 0.001) among those considering both MaPGAS options, as were mean ratings on the Uncertainty subscale \[64.1 (SD 25.5; P < 0.001)]. Concerns surrounding complications were the top factor contributing to uncertainty and decisional conflict."
### Conclusions
"In a cross-sectional national sample of individuals seeking MaPGAS, decisional uncertainty was the highest for those considering both MaPGAS options compared with metoidioplasty or phalloplasty alone. This suggests this cohort would benefit from focused decision support."
## Introduction and Objectives
- "Metoidioplasty and phalloplasty gender-affirming surgery (MaPGAS) is increasingly performed for transgender and nonbinary individuals assigned female sex at birth (AFAB) to facilitate genital gender identity congruence. Although MaPGAS is associated with improved quality of life and gender congruence, it carries high risk and requires patients to make multiple complex decisions. For example, patients must make decisions about surgical timing, whether to have removal of internal reproductive organs (the cervix, vagina, uterus, uterine tubes, and ovaries), fertility planning, perineal reconstruction (vaginectomy and/or scrotoplasty), and decide between metoidioplasty and phalloplasty... These procedural choices have lasting implications for future fertility, urinary, and sexual function."
- "MaPGAS performed with urethral lengthening is associated with a high risk of urologic complications including up to 50% urethral stricture and fistula rate,6 potentially resulting in repeat procedures, prolonged catheterization, genitourinary infection, and lower urinary tract compromise."
- "As is true of many complex reconstructive surgical procedures, there is currently a lack of quality published patient-reported outcome measures (PROMs) to elucidate the extent and impact of MaPGAS genitourinary outcomes and complications."
- "The 2015 United States Transgender Survey (an anonymous survey that queried 27,715 transgender and nonbinary respondents from all 50 states on a variety of categories, including demographics and health-related subject matter) found that 49% of transgender men reported being unsure if they wanted metoidioplasty, and 43% reported being unsure if they wanted phalloplasty. The level of uncertainty was lower among nonbinary participants AFAB, with 24% being unsure if they wanted metoidioplasty and 19% being unsure if they wanted phalloplasty."
- "Although some degree of decisional conflict is inherent in complex decision-making, studies associated with high levels of decisional conflict found delayed decisions, poor quality decisions, and decision regret."
- "the Decisional Conflict Scale (DCS). The DCS was developed in 1995 to measure healthcare consumer uncertainty, factors that contribute to uncertainty, and perceived effectiveness of decision-making. The instrument was validated in an influenza immunization study and a breast cancer screening study and is widely used to objectively measure decisional conflict surrounding medical decision-making."
## Methods
- "Participants were recruited by members of the community via social media platforms, network forums, and flyers at one urban clinic. Participants were not offered monetary compensation for completion of the survey. The survey took an average of 30 minutes to complete and included demographic information (medical, emotional, and surgical history), type of gender-affirming surgery considered, and the DCS."
- "The DCS includes 16 items grouped into five domains, which measure uncertainty (eg, “I am clear about the best choice for me”), perceptions of feeling informed (eg, “I know which options are available to me”), clarity of personal values (eg, “I am clear about which benefits mean the most to me”), perceived support (eg, “I have enough support from others to make a choice”), and perceived effectiveness of prior decisions (eg, “I am satisfied with my decision”). Items are rated on a five-point Likert scale (list scale anchors low to high). Total DCS scores range from 0 to 100. A score less than 25 is associated with low conflict, whereas scores greater than 37.5 indicate greater decisional conflict, “decision delay, or feeling unsure about implementation.”"
## Results
- "Responses from 264 participants were included in this analysis. Mean age was 29 years (SD 8.18, range 18–64); 57% (n = 151) and 64% (n = 168), respectively, identified as men or transgender men (multiple responses allowed), and 43% (n = 114) identified as gender diverse (nonbinary, gender queer, or gender nonconforming). The sample was 80% (n = 210) White, 78% (n = 206) nonrural, 45% (n = 120) privately insured, and 56% (n = 148) had completed 4 or more years of college."
- "Evaluating cohorts by MaPGAS options being considered, three groups emerged: considering metoidioplasty only (n = 84), considering phalloplasty only (n = 87), and considering both metoidioplasty and phalloplasty (n = 93; ie, undecided on MaPGAS option). There were no significant differences between the three groups in demographic characteristics (Table [1](https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC11139465/#T1))."
- "The majority of respondents, 82% (n = 216), were on gender-affirming hormone therapy for more than one year, and 75% (n = 199) had previously undergone chest surgery. Among respondents considering MaPGAS, less than half had undergone hysterectomy or oophorectomy."
- "The mean total DCS scores (Table [2](https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC11139465/#T2)) were significantly higher for those considering both metoidioplasty and phalloplasty (39.8, _P_ < 0.001) compared with either MaPGAS option alone. These same respondents who were considering both MaPGAS options also had significantly higher Uncertainty subscale scores 65.4 (25.5, _P_ < 0.001) than respondents in the other two groups: considering metoidioplasty only 43.3 (29.7) and considering phalloplasty only 36.7 (30.4). Those considering only phalloplasty had significantly lower scores on Informed, Values Clarity, and Support subscales indicating feeling less conflict and more informed, clear, and supported (Table [2](https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC11139465/#T2))."
- "A total of 167 (63%) participants provided responses to the open-ended question “Please list any reasons for uncertainty about the gender affirming medical treatment you are considering.” On analysis, we found five main themes as reasons for uncertainty. The five themes centered around **fear of, and questions about, complications**, **concern about outcomes** (eg, if they would be able to achieve the outcomes they wanted), **lack of information/knowledge**, **cost/insurance concerns**, and **difficulty weighing risks versus benefits**. Exemplar quotes for top themes related to MaPGAS decision uncertainty can be found in Table [3](https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC11139465/#T3)."
- "The most common reason for MaPGAS uncertainty was concern about complications, including urinary complications (urethral stricture and fistula), loss of sensation, loss of sexual function, and infection. Many respondents were concerned about long-term complications necessitating additional surgery. These concerns were especially pronounced for those considering phalloplasty or urethral lengthening and those with preexisting medical conditions."
- "Some respondents indicated that they were leaning toward having a surgery that is associated with a lower risk of complications rather than having a surgery that would allow them to achieve their transition goals. Other respondents wondered if there would be better options with fewer complications if they waited to have surgery."
- "Respondents also cited a lack of knowledge about MaPGAS, including risks, complications, outcomes, and options as a cause of uncertainty, and some emphasized a need for information on surgeons who perform MaPGAS and access to their outcome photographs."
- “I would love more peer-reviewed, rigorous studies regarding complication rates and outcomes, especially about the UL \[urethral lengthening] w/o vaginectomy combination."
- "Difficulty weighing the risks versus benefits of MaPGAS was another source of uncertainty, and some were additionally uncertain whether resolution of dysphoria or being able to stand to urinate would be worth such an involved surgery, complication risk, and extended time away from work. For these reasons, some participants leaned toward not having any MaPGAS procedures."
## Discussion
- "Open-ended feedback from participants revealed that the most common reasons for uncertainty included fear of complications, concern about outcomes, cost, lack of knowledge and information about MaPGAS, and difficulty weighing risks versus benefits."
- "Based on our review, this is one of the few studies, and the only U.S. study, to evaluate decisional conflict among individuals considering different MaPGAS options using a validated measure."
- "Mokken et al evaluated the association of a MaPGAS decision aid and DCS scores in the Netherlands. The mean decisional conflict score of the two cohorts demonstrated less decisional conflict than in our sample... The lower baseline DCS scores in the Mokken et al study may be due to their cohort having already elected to pursue MaPGAS and being scheduled for a surgical consult as compared with our cross-sectional study, including participants who may have been in earlier stages of considering MaPGAS options. Additionally, while Mokken et al focused exclusively on transgender men, over a third of our respondents identified as gender diverse or nonbinary. Although prior studies have shown nonbinary AFAB individuals may have less interest in MaPGAS, there is limited published data comparing rates of decisional uncertainty between transgender men and nonbinary AFAB individuals. Further, their thematic analysis of qualitative interviews from the Netherlands sample revealed different themes associated with decisional conflict, including participant history, mental health, and social support. Although the qualitative analysis of the Netherland sample revealed some overlap in themes associated with decisional conflict, including concerns related to participant health history, mental health (eg, gender dysphoria), and social support, factors that were more prominent in our findings, such as cost, insurance coverage, and lack of knowledge and information, likely reflect differences in culture and access to gender-affirming care between the United States and the Netherlands, which make our data more generalizable to a US population."
- "Our findings suggest the necessity for additional tools that can be used to address decisional conflict in this population. We also believe it is important to consider the role of PROMs in the creation and implementation of a decision support tool. The use of PROMs in clinical encounters provides the opportunity to collect high-quality patient-centered data and can empower individuals by involving them directly in the decision-making process, which may help enhance shared decision-making and decrease decisional conflict. Currently, PROMs that assess the outcomes of genital gender-affirming procedures such as MaPGAS are not validated in the transgender population, making clear the need for MaPGAS-specific PROMs developed in partnership with transgender patient stakeholders."
- "Additional options to explore may include group medical appointments or shared education classes tailored to individuals considering MaPGAS, which would offer a moderated forum for discussing concerns, sharing experiences, and addressing questions in a supportive environment. Increased discussion of complications and the provision of photographs of surgical outcomes during consultations can further aid in setting realistic expectations and provide further decision support."
## Limitations
"Cross-sectional survey-based studies have inherent limitations. They capture a single point in time, depend on self-report, and are susceptible to recall bias. Given the high variability in ratings on DCS subscale items, our sample size may have limited power to approach significant differences in subgroup comparisons, although the open-ended responses validate the survey ratings, confirming that uncertainty and lack of feeling informed were major factors in explaining DCS scores. Additionally, a large proportion of participants were White, could read and understand English, were highly educated and insured, and had access to a computer or smartphone with internet, which may impact the generalizability of the results. However, we used multiple modalities to sample the community, and future phases of this work will prioritize seeking more diverse input."
## Conclusions
"This US cross-sectional study of 264 transgender men and nonbinary participants AFAB demonstrates a high level of decisional conflict and uncertainty amongst individuals considering MaPGAS, particularly in those who are undecided between phalloplasty and metoidioplasty. Thematic analysis of open-ended comments revealed that the most common reasons for MaPGAS-related decisional uncertainty included fear of complications, concern about outcomes and associated unresolved gender dysphoria, cost, lack of knowledge and information, and difficulties weighing risks versus benefits. These findings suggest this cohort may benefit from focused decision support that provides information about MaPGAS procedure options, risks, expected outcomes, and goals clarification exercises."
## References
1 Canner, Joseph K., Omar Harfouch, Lisa M. Kodadek, Danielle Pelaez, Devin Coon, Anaeze C. Offodile II, Adil H. Haider, and Brandyn D. Lau. "Temporal Trends in Gender-Affirming Surgery Among Transgender Patients in the United States." *JAMA Surgery* **153**, no. 7 (2018): [external link to article](https://jamanetwork.com/journals/jamasurgery/fullarticle/2673384)
3 de Brouwer, Iris J., Els Elaut, Inga Becker-Hebly, Gunter Heylens, Timo O. Nieder, Tim C. van de Grift, and Baudewijntje P.C. Kreukels. "Aftercare Needs Following Gender-Affirming Surgeries: Findings from the ENIGI Multicenter European Follow-Up Study." *The Journal of Sexual Medicine* **18**, no. 11 (2021), 1921-1932: [external link to article](https://academic.oup.com/jsm/article/18/11/1921/6955936)
4 Nikolavsky, Dmitriy, Michael Hughes, and Lee C Zhao. "Urologic Complications After Phalloplasty or Metoidioplasty." *Clinics in Plastic Surgery* **45**, no. 3 (2018), 425-435: [external link to abstract](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/29908632/)
5 Santucci, Richard A. "Urethral Complications After Transgender Phalloplasty: Strategies to Treat Them and Minimize Their Occurrence." *Clinical Anatomy* **31**, no. 2 (2018), 187-190: [external link](https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/ca.23021)
6 Dy, Geolani W., Jeff Sun, Michael A. Granieri, and Lee C. Zhao. "Reconstructive Management Pearls for the Transgender Patient." *Current Urology Reports* **19**, no. 6 (2018), 36: [external link](https://urology.wisc.edu/wp-content/uploads/2020/03/GAS.currurolreports.2018.pdf)
7 Clennon, Emily K., Leigh H. Martin, Sarah K. Fadich, Laura Zeigen, Gaines Blasdel, Craig Sineath, and Geolani W. Dy. "Community Engagement and Patient-Centered Implementation of Patient-Reported Outcome Measures (PROMs) in Gender Affirming Surgery: a Systematic Review." *Current Sexual Health Reports* **14** (2022), 17-29: [external link to article abstract](https://link.springer.com/article/10.1007/s11930-021-00323-6)
13 Becerra Pérez, Maria Margarita, Matthew Menear, Jamie C. Brehaut, and France Légaré. "Extent and Predictors of Decision Regreat about Health Care Decisions: A Systematic Review." *Medical Decision Making* **36**, no. 6 (2016), 777-790: [external link to article abstract](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/26975351/)
14 Becerra Pérez, Maria Margarita, Matthew Menear, Stephane Turcotte, Michel Labrecque, and France Légaré. "More primary care patients regret health decisions if they experienced decisional conflict in the consultation: a second analysis of a multicenter descriptive study." *BMC Family Practice* **17**, (2016): [external link](https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC5103443/)
18 
19 
20 
21 
22 
24 Agochukwu-Mmonu, Nnenaya, Asa Radix, Lee Zhao, Danil Makarov, Rachel Bluebond-Langner, A. Mark Frederick, Elijah Castle, and Carolyn Berry. "[[2022-GAS-PROMs|Patient reported outcomes in genital gender-affirming surgery: the time is now.]]" *Journal of Patient-Reported Outcomes* **6** (2022): [external link](https://link.springer.com/article/10.1186/s41687-022-00446-x)
25 
26 
27 
28 
29 
30 
35 
36 
# Tags
#/2024 #DCS #decisionalconflict #decisionalconflictscale #GAS-metoidioplasty #GAS-phalloplasty #GainesBlasel #GlynElwyn #JeremyBMyers #JohnFNigriny #JohnHTurco #LeeKBrown #LindaMKinney #PROMs #PRSGlobalOpen #patientreportedoutcomemeasures #PlasticandReconstructiveSurgery-GlobalOpen #RachelAMoses #ReadeOtto-Moudry #RebeccaLButcher #scientificarticle #scientificjournal #transgender-Netherlands #transgender-UnitedStates #urethralfistula  #urethralstricture

 #unfinished-references