Rutherford, Leo L, Elijah R Castle, Noah Adams, Logan Berrian, Linden Jennings, Ayden Scheim, Aaron Devor, and Nathan J Lachowsky. "Promoting trans patient autonomy in surgical preparation for phalloplasty and metoidioplasty: results from a community-based cross-sectional survey and implications for preoperative assessments." *BMC Medical Ethics* **25**, no. 1 (2024), 155: [external link](https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC11686888/)
# Promoting trans patient autonomy in surgical preparation for phalloplasty and metoidioplasty: results from a community-based cross-sectional survey and implications for preoperative assessments
## Abstract
### Background
"Little research investigates what resources are useful in helping patients to feel prepared to undergo phalloplasty or metoidioplasty, and how assessments and resources can promote patient autonomy in the process. Respect for patient autonomy is one of the central tenets of ethical healthcare, yet historically, scholarship related to pre-surgical assessments for gender-affirming surgery has focused determining the ideal surgical candidate rather than respecting patient autonomy and ascertaining individual patient needs."
### Methods
"This study sought to fill this gap by utilizing data from PROGRESS (Patient-Reported Outcomes of Genital Reconstruction and Experiences of Surgical Satisfaction), a cross-sectional, community-based survey of trans and nonbinary adults from the United States of America and Canada who had undergone one or more of these surgeries."
### Results
"Results revealed most participants (86%, n = 186) felt prepared to undergo surgery, though the majority of our sample (53%, n = 105) did not find referral letter assessments to be helpful. Peer support such as online resources/blogs were rated as highly useful, along with surgical consults. In a multivariable logistic regression, higher perceived preparedness was associated with identifying as queer (inclusive of gay, bi and pansexual compared to being straight), and feeling that one’s assessment process was useful (as opposed to not useful)."
### Conclusion
"Healthcare professionals who interact with preparing patients should develop new or utilize existing resources to assist patients in identifying their preparation needs and achieving preparedness. Our data supports assessments that center surgical care planning rather than assessing level of gender dysphoria. Future longitudinal research could further refine which assessment processes are most effective in helping patients who are preparing for these surgeries. Assessments should ensure that patients are appropriately prepared to undergo and recover from surgery through a robust process of informed consent."
## Background
- "Currently, radial forearm free flap (RFF) phalloplasty is the most common type of phalloplasty globally, though other types of phalloplasty, such as anterolateral thigh flap (ALT) and abdominal flap, among others, are also performed."
- "**Metoidioplasty** is performed by releasing ligaments of the clitoris and uses labia tissue to increase the bulk of the phallus/penis. Unlike phalloplasty, a donor site is not needed, and therefore this procedure causes no major scarring."
- "Some evidence suggests that patient preparedness may lead to positive surgical outcomes, higher quality of life after surgery, and fewer surgical complications. In contrast, feeling unprepared for surgery has been associated with patient dissatisfaction."
- "In one qualitative study, participants reported spending a large amount of time and energy preparing themselves and highlighted relationships with their care team as important to their preoperative process. Other research suggests that social media may also be a source of content that helps patients prepare for, or ask questions after, surgery; one analysis found that patients used social media to ask questions about post-operative scarring and wound care, medical supplies, recovery, and general appearance. There are data which indicates that, out of a variety of methods used by patients before and after surgery to improve their experiences with their genitals, peer/social support was found to be one of the most helpful methods both before and after surgery."
- " Referral letter assessments are usually conducted by a mental healthcare provider, social worker, and/or medical provider. Such assessments typically do not focus on aspects of preparation such as hair removal (specifically prior to phalloplasty), exercise, diet, aftercare planning, or physical and psychological changes that may result from the surgery; sometimes, these topics are addressed in educational materials from some surgical teams and service providers who work with patients preparing for phalloplasty and metoidioplasty, but these practices are not required as per the WPATH SOC."
- "**There is evidence indicating that referral letters serve as barriers to care, rather than facilitators.**"
- "**Surgical care planning** then, will typically include obtaining a letter of support in line with the WPATH SOC, but will also provide more comprehensive educational and resource support in line with the other elements of preparedness discussed above... If this informed decision-making process fails and patients are not able to make the best decisions for their own bodies, patient autonomy is compromised; this is discussed next in further detail."
- "Respect for patient autonomy is one of the foundational principles of biomedical ethics; as described by Beauchamp and Childress. It underlines the need to allow individuals to make decisions and take actions based on their own beliefs and values. One of the ways in which autonomy is respected in healthcare is in the informed consent process, through which a patient is provided with the information necessary to understand and voluntarily consent to the planned medical intervention. A readiness assessment can enable this process by ensuring that the patient has adequate understanding of the surgery they are about to undergo."
- "Elliot Marrow talks about the inception of pre-surgical assessments in the 1950s in a recent article, describing how few surgeons were willing to provide gender-affirming care to trans people... Initially, this involved ensuring that patients would blend-in with cisnormative culture by being heterosexual and looking a certain way (or passing as cisgender). Psychologists and clinicians felt they needed justification beyond patient desire to undergo surgery, and, further, feared backlash from patients and the media if they allowed the ‘wrong people’ to access surgery."
- "These early clinician experiences lead to the creation of the WPATH SOC (then called the Harry Benjamin Standards of Care for Gender Identity Disorders) and clinicians began to assess patient surgical readiness. This process was designed, in part, to protect medical teams and additionally, out of fear of regret from patients; it was not designed to support patients in choosing what they wanted for their own bodies, nor to promote patient autonomy or informed consent. **The gatekeeping nature of these original assessments led trans people to feel as though assessment processes are not designed to support them or their decision making; this feeling is still pervasive today and described in recent literature.**"
- "The aim of this investigation was to utilize data from a community-based cross-sectional sample of trans individuals who had undergone phalloplasty and/or metoidioplasty to examine factors associated with feeling prepared for these surgeries and argue for the creation of more patient-centered and autonomy-promoting preparedness programs based in evidence."
## Methods
- "Patient-Reported Outcomes of Genital Reconstruction and Experiences of Surgical Satisfaction (PROGRESS) was a community-based, patient-oriented, and cross-sectional survey. The study questionnaire was developed by a team of seven trans community members with lived experiences of phalloplasty and/or metoidioplasty, and was led by the first author... Survey responses were collected online from April to July 2022. Eligibility criteria included adults identifying as trans, nonbinary or other related terms; having had phalloplasty or metoidioplasty; living in the United States of America or Canada; and being able to self-complete the questionnaire in English."
- "We posted recruitment flyers on trans community-identified social media channels, Facebook groups, and Reddit forums, and shared flyers in trans-related listservs. The survey was cross-sectional, online, self-completed, and anonymous, and included questions about demographics, preparing for surgery, recovery experiences, perceived changes in mental health, gender dysphoria and euphoria, and overall surgical satisfaction. Participants were not provided with an honorarium for taking part in the survey."
### Measures
"The **primary outcome variable for this analysis was perceived preparedness for surgery.** This was measured using responses to a single question adapted from Kenton’s Preoperative Preparedness Questionnaire... response options include a 6-point Likert scale ranging from “strongly disagree” to “strongly agree,” which we then dichotomized into ‘disagree’ versus ‘agree’ for logistic regression analyses."
### Exposure measures
- "Demographic characteristics included age, ethnoracial identity, education, income, sexual orientation, and country. Other exposures of interest included type of gender-affirming assessment, mental health in the year leading up to surgery, access to community support or resources prior to surgery, and self-reported usefulness of assessments."
- "To determine the type of assessment, participants were asked a question created by our team which read, “What did the process of obtaining approval to have surgery look like for you?”. Response options included: two letters (from a therapist or mental health care provider), one letter, interview by an assessor, a combination of letter(s) and something else, a workshop or training, and ‘other.’"
- "A follow- up question asked, “how useful was this method of approval in preparing you to have surgery?”. Responses to the question included a 5-point Likert scale ranging from ‘not at all’ to ‘extremely useful’. These responses were also dichotomized into ‘not useful’ versus ‘useful,’ where ‘useful’ included all responses other than ‘not at all.’"
- "We adapted the Canadian Community Health Survey’s single-item measure of mental health to be used in the past tense and added a time qualifier to determine mental health in the year prior to surgery. The item asked, “How would you describe your mental health in the year before you had phalloplasty or metoidioplasty?”. Response options were unchanged from the original measure and included a 5-point Likert ranging from ‘poor’ to ‘excellent.’ Categories were dichotomized into ‘poor or fair’ versus ‘good, very good, or excellent’."
### Analysis
"The final analytic sample, which excluded those who did not answer the dependent variable questions, included 203 responses."
## Results
- "Most of our participants self-identified ethnoracially as white (84%). Participants described their sexual orientation as queer (37%), straight (27%), gay (21%), and bi (24%). Our participants mostly had high levels of education with 30% having attended graduate school or achieving a graduate degree. Additionally, participants had high personal income levels with 40% making more than $80,000 annually (CAD or USD depending on their location).
- "In terms of surgeries, about half (51%, n = 103) had solely phalloplasty, 83 (38%) had solely metoidioplasty, and 21 (9%) had both procedures. Only 40% (n = 85) of our sample had surgery prior to 2020, whereas 59% (n = 124) had surgery in the past two years. Over half (54%, n = 110) of our respondents were identified as ‘active process’ meaning either they were waiting for additional surgeries or between planned stages of surgeries. Participants typically traveled outside of their state or province of residence for surgery (42% n = 85), but only 10% (n = 20) traveled outside their country. However, 14% (n = 28) of participants had surgery within their city of residence."
- "Overall, participants reported high levels of preparedness, with 86% (n = 186) feeling prepared."
- "Overall, 53% (n = 105) of our sample reported that their assessment was not at all useful in preparing them for surgery... Among those who received two letters, half (55%, n = 88) said this was not at all useful in preparing them to have surgery. Only 13% (n = 26) reported feeling that two letters were very or extremely useful in preparing them for surgery."
- "While preparing for surgery, 92.1% (n = 187) of our sample accessed community supports or resources, including conversation with peers, support groups or community-created resources. The resources most highly rated as helpful included social media, including Facebook groups and reddit forums, with 47% (n = 101) participants indicating these were ‘very helpful’ in preparing them for surgery. Similarly, participants rated conversations with peers as very helpful (n = 48, 22%) or helpful (n = 34, 15%) in preparing for surgery. Outside of peer-created content or resources, consults with surgeons were also rated highly as helping people prepare, with 40% (n = 87) stating these were ‘very helpful’, and 24% (n = 52) rating them as ‘helpful’. No demographic or other characteristics were significantly associated with feeling prepared in bivariate analyses."
- "The multivariable logistic regression analyses resulted in a final model with 2 statistically significant factors: sexual orientation and usefulness of assessment processes. More specifically, those who self-identified as queer were more likely to report feeling prepared for surgery than non-queer participants... We found that queer participants were statistically significantly more likely to have access community in the time leading up to surgery (p < .05), which may have contributed to greater feelings of preparedness, as compared to non-queer participants."
- "It is well-known within the trans community that prospective patients preparing for gender-affirming surgery spend a large amount of time preparing themselves, outside of their relationships with their surgeons/surgical teams, by seeking out community information or support to help them feel ready. Other literature documents peer support and shared experiences as useful to patients who are recovering from surgery, experiencing a health concern, or undergoing medical treatments for cancer. While accessing community support or resources was not a statistically significant correlate of feeling prepared, participants’ responses clearly indicated the utility of these resources. It is likely that there was a lack of statistical significance related to community support due to the small number of respondents who did not access community support (8%, n = 16)."
- "Our participants also rated surgical consults as highly useful while preparing for surgery. These consults often deliver important patient education and address questions or concerns. Along with surgical consults, in many other surgical fields, patients are now being helped by social workers or other practitioners to develop care plans or for pre-surgical preparation. Some literature suggests that patients given resources by care teams are more likely to feel prepared, so long as they judge those resources to be beneficial."
- "Our research adds to other literature critiquing referral letter assessments as not useful to those accessing gender affirming care. While one study noted prospective patients feeling that they wouldn’t be considered ready for surgery if they have any mental health concerns, another noted that many patients feel assessments are simply gatekeeping processes. Still another has critiqued assessments as not offering information needed for patients to be fully informed about what to expect postoperatively."
- "This suggests that, along with the other literature previously mentioned, assessments often do not uphold patient autonomy if they do not serve the process of informed consent by assessing patient knowledge and providing education regarding the procedure. Our results suggest that needs for pre-surgical preparation vary between patients. This may mean that individualized approaches to helping patients better prepare are needed for these surgeries."
- "Assessments or surgical care planning that recognizes mental health as influencing outcomes but focuses on other aspects of surgical preparation may, therefore, lead to more readiness among prospective patients. More research is needed to understand how mental health plays a role in promoting preparedness for these procedures."
### Correlates of surgical preparedness
## Discussion
### Limitations
### Implications
## Conclusion
"Healthcare professionals who interact with preparing patients should develop new or utilize existing resources to assist patients in identifying their preparation needs and achieving preparedness. Our data supports assessments that center surgical care planning rather than assessing level of gender dysphoria. This can ensure the necessary flexibility so that such assessments are based in the evidence of what will be most helpful for patients and, ultimately, that patient autonomy is upheld through a robust informed consent process. While it is important to adjust as needed for individual patients to ensure their needs are met, the educational and planning content of assessments should be standardized throughout gender-affirming care so that all patients can benefit from high-quality care. Future research should further investigate what patients need from assessments in order to feel prepared for surgery."
## References
2 Puckett, Jae A, Peter Cleary, Kinton Rossman, Michael E Newcomb, Brian Mustanski. "Barriers to Gender-Affirming Care for Transgender and Gender Nonconforming Individuals." *Sexuality Research and Social Policy* **15** (2018), 48-59: [external link](https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC5842950/)
3 Schultheiss, Dirk, Alexander I. Gabouev, and Udo Jonas. "Nikolaj A. Bogoraz (1874-1952): Pioneer of Phalloplasty and Penile Implant Surgery." *The Journal of Sexual Medicine* **2**, no. 1 (2005), 139-146: [external link to abstract summary](https://academic.oup.com/jsm/article-abstract/2/1/139/6863025?redirectedFrom=fulltext&login=false)
4 Lane, Megan, Emily C. Sluiter, Shane D. Morrison, Devin Coon, Katherine M. Gast, Jens U. Berli, and William M. Kuzon. "Phalloplasty: understanding the chaos." *Plastic and Aesthetic Research* **7**, no. 51 (2020): [external link](https://d1wqtxts1xzle7.cloudfront.net/65261797/3679-libre.pdf?1608888378=&response-content-disposition=inline%3B+filename%3DPhalloplasty_understanding_the_chaos.pdf&Expires=1777421220&Signature=PFAbVytiKcLQ86yq0eklvC6J-Utftbt2CFvoC43sRYbUJeIafo8vBPh~6HtPku-v~6JNlAh0TSnBXDZrlJcGULtIBrQNBuO2VZTlpIZGzAp20lag2q2Htbm3L6ljpYz7XlxkFs--dGoiytQz9rNSGNnHESY8Xzi2IxQajVKfx9cfgnTgl5Ltat1LBRjHpPy3rqWJgiIoplzqobd6Dz4Lph1y8Y60N8jcOt0FC~ZLOE~1Fc-HmvTP0fwzM8BXC9~-sIRFpJJpbZphDVaL9DMzz~eB2bmAoSHSzKnbZJFsO1Tm1UwlIotoCSZQWJOFMlYPESfWYvkIbn0qc6cPDnGkUw__&Key-Pair-Id=APKAJLOHF5GGSLRBV4ZA)
5 Heston, Aaron L, Nick O Esmonde, Daniel D Dugi III, and Jens Urs Berli. "Phalloplasty: techniques and outcomes." *Translational Andrology and Urology* **8**, no. 3 (2019), 254-265: [external link](https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC6626313/)
6 Hadj-Moussa, Miriam, Shailesh Agarwal, Dana A. Ohl, and William M. Kuzon. "Masculinizing Genital Gender Confirmation Surgery." *Sexual Medicine Reviews* **7**, no. 1 (2019), 141-155: [external link to article abstract](https://academic.oup.com/smr/article-abstract/7/1/141/6830853?redirectedFrom=fulltext&login=false)
7 Stojanovic, Borko, Marko Bencic, Marta Bizic, and Miroslav L Djordjevic. "Metoidioplasty in Gender Affirmation: A Review." *Indian Journal of Plastic Surgery* **55**, no. 2 (2022), 156-161: [external link](https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC9398530/)
8 Bizic, Marta, Borko Stojanovic, Marko Bencic, Noémi Bordás, and Miroslav Djordjevic. "Overview on metoidioplasty: variants of the technique." *International Journal of Impotence Research* **33** (2021), 762-770: [external link](https://d1wqtxts1xzle7.cloudfront.net/66341001/s41443-020-00346-y-libre.pdf?1618946312=&response-content-disposition=inline%3B+filename%3DOverview_on_metoidioplasty_variants_of_t.pdf&Expires=1777421875&Signature=L6pAORGq~bVc2zTByYEV2HgVc6xJk56D5Sn0FYTFBWabrGBH1SJVd7kuMXWpisizZUL~UEAjsFdWycOHcGyPJbRSkUO~TNRQ9fMQMOWlCV0DZ19ylh3Jb3b4oq9M3hRSaPOwy210pov9vEwwtyo-ul325iTSZ6D6FGhke-Hd-94d0QtWROdrtv2-ujdn8YMzZXNGW6pNbpuPRA0H5jh6FKOQ3fmnKQFy9ranHt8flkSY~W8s-0z1OB6M3MteM3pOQZfJfuscp0N20z6QyFfI1VKO3al4fHex50j1BN6n4cl9n2qxjLGo5J67GcxEv1JWwdizAqVh-43IKIsEX6NCkg__&Key-Pair-Id=APKAJLOHF5GGSLRBV4ZA)
9 Vukadinovic, Vojkan, Borko Stojanovic, Mark Majstorovic, Aleksandar Milosevic. "[[2014-FtMClitoralAnatomy|The Role of Clitoral Anatomy in Female to Male Sex Reassignment Surgery]]." *The Scientific World Journal* Special Issue: "Gender Dysphoria: The Role of Sex Reassignment Surgery" (2014): [external link](https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1155/2014/437378)
11 Gillis, Chelsia, Marlyn Gill, Leah Gramlich, S Nicole Culos-Reed, Greg Nelson, Olle Ljungqvist, Franco Carli, and Tanis Fenton. "Patients' perspectives of prehabilitation as an extension of Enhanced Recovery After Surgery protocols." *Canadian Journal of Surgery* **64**, no. 6 (2021), e578-e587: [external link](https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC8565881/)
12 Gillis, Chelsia, Olle Ljungqvist, and Francesco Carli. "Prehabilitation, enhanced recovery after surgery, or both? A narrative review." *British Journal of Anaesthesia* **128**, no. 3 (2022), 434-448: [external link](https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0007091221007959?via%3Dihub)
14 Kenton, Kimberly, Thythy Pham, Elizabeth Mueller, and Linda Brubaker. "Patient preparedness: an important predictor of surgical outcome." *American Journal of Obstetrics and Gynecology* **197**, no. 6 (2007), 654e1-654e6: [external link to abstract](https://www.ovid.com/journals/ajog/abstract/00000447-200712000-00038~patient-preparedness-an-important-predictor-of-surgical)
15 Makhoul, Alan T, R Thomas Day, Jasmine C Walker, Catherine M Hammack-Aviran, Salam Al Kassis, Julian S Winocour, and Brian C Drolet. "Perioperative Experiences of Transgender Adults Seeking Gender-Affirming Surgery: A Qualitative Interview Study." *Transgender Health* **8**, no. 3 (2023), 231-237: [external link](https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC10277990/)
16 Latack, Kyle, Widya Adidharma, Dominic Moog, Thomas Satterwhite, Miriam Hadj-Moussa, and Shane Morrison. "Are We Preparing Patients for Gender-Affirming Surgery? A Thematic Social Media Analysis." *Plastic and Reconstructive Surgery* **146**, no. 4 (2020), 519-521: [external link](https://journals.lww.com/plasreconsurg/fulltext/2020/10000/are_we_preparing_patients_for_gender_affirming.70.aspx)
21 Cavanaugh, Timothy, Ruben Hopwood, and Cei Lambert. "Informed Consent in the Medical Care of Transgender and Gender-Nonconforming Patients." *AMA Journal of Ethics* **18**, no. 11 (2016), 1147-1155: [external link](https://journalofethics.ama-assn.org/article/informed-consent-medical-care-transgender-and-gender-nonconforming-patients/2016-11)
26 Beauchamp, Tom L. and James F. Childress. *Principles of Biomedical Ethics*, 9th edition. Oxford University Press, 2019.
27 Marrow, Elliot. ""I Hope That As Our Selection Becomes More Accurate, the Number... Will Be Very Few": The Creation of Assessment Criteria for Gender-Affirming Care, 1960s-1980s." *Psychology of Sexual Orientation and Gender Diversity* **11**, no. 2 (2024), 183-201: [external link](https://psycnet.apa.org/fulltext/2023-64773-001.pdf)
28 Fisk, Norman M. "Editorial: Gender dysphoria syndrome -- the conceptualization that liberalizes indications for total gender reorientation and implies a broadly based multi-dimensional rehabilitative regimen." *Western Journal of Medicine* **120**, no. 5 (1974), 386-391: [external link](https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC1130142/)
29 Elkins, Richard. "Science, Politics and Clinical Intervention: Harry Benjamin, Transsexualism and the Problem of Heteronormativity." *Sexualities* (2005): [external link to abstract](https://journals.sagepub.com/doi/abs/10.1177/1363460705049578)
30 MacKinnon, Kinnon R., F. Ashley, H. Kia, J.S.H. Lam, Y. Krakowsky, and Lori E. Ross. "Preventing transition 'regret': An institutional ethnography of gender-affirming medical care assessment practices in Canada." *Social Science & Medicine* **291** (2021): [external link](https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0277953621008091)
31 Namaste, Viviane K. *Sex Change, Social Change: Reflections on Identity, Institutions, and Imperialism*. Canadian Scholars' Press, 2011.
37 Powell, Rachel, Neil W Scott, Anne Manyande, Julie Bruce, Clause Vögele, Lucie MT Byrne-Davis, Mary Unsworth, Christian Osmer, and Marie Johnston. "Psychological preparation and postoperative outcomes for adults undergoing surgery under general anesthesia." *Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews* **5** (2016): [external link](https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC8687603/)
38 Lichtenstein, Max, Laura Stein, Erin Connolly, Zil G Goldstein, Tyler Martinson, Linda Tiersten, Sangyoon J Shin, John Henry Pang, and Joshua D Safer. "The Mount Sinai Patient-Centered Preoperative Criteria Meant to Optimize Outcomes Are Less of a Barrier to Care Than WPATH SOC 7 Criteria Before Transgender-Specific Surgery." *Transgender Health* **5**, no. 3 (2020), 166-172: [external link](https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC7906222/)
39 MacKinnon, Kinnon R., Daniel Grace, Stella L. Ng, Suzanne R. Sicchia, and Lori E. Ross. "'I don't think they thought I was ready': How pre-transition assessments create care inequities for trans people with complex mental health in Canada." *International Journal of Mental Health* **49,** no. 1 (2020), 56-80: [external link](https://maxottawa.ca/wp-content/uploads/2025/04/I-dont-think-they-thought-I-was-ready-How-pretransition-assessments-create-care-inequities-for-trans-people-with-complex-mental-health-in-Canada.pdf)
40 Amengual, Travis, Kaitlyn Kunstman, R Brett Lloyd, Aron Janssen, and Annie B Wescott. "Readiness assessments for gender-affirming surgical treatments: A systematic scoping review of historical practices and changing ethical considerations." *Frontiers in Psychiatry* (2022): [external link](https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC9630738/)
41 Ashley, Florence. "Surgical Informed Consent and Recognizing a Perioperative Duty to Disclose in Transgender Health Care." *McGill Journal of Law and Health* **13**, no. 1 (2019): [external link](https://mjlh.mcgill.ca/wp-content/uploads/2020/01/mjlh-13.1-ashley-2020-01-14.pdf)
43 Shelemy, Lucas, Sue Cotton, Catherine Crane, and Matthew Knight. "Systematic review of prospective adult mental health outcomes following affirmative interventions for gender dysphoria." *International Journal of Transgender Health* **26**, no. 3 (2025), 480-500: [external link](https://www.tandfonline.com/doi/full/10.1080/26895269.2024.2333525#abstract)
# Tags
#/2024 #AaronDevor #AydenScheim #communitycare #ElijahRCastle #GAS-metoidioplasty #GAS-phalloplasty #informedconsent #LeoLRutherford #LindenJennings #LoganBerrian #NathanJLachowsky #NoahAdams #PROGRESS #Patient-ReportedOutcomesofGenitalReconstructionandExperiencesofSurgicalSatisfaction #surgicalcareplanning #surgicalpreparation #surgicalreadiness #transgender #transgender-Candada #transgender-UnitedStates