# Trans Femme Futures 
by Nat Raha & Mijke Van Der Drift, 2024
### Introduction: Trans Liberation Is Between Us
- “**Trans liberation** is a collective movement to free all people from regimes of gender oppression through social and material transformation. Trans lives have transgressed and challenged these regimes through changing or refusing gender, which we propose is a collective effort that emerges through the practices we undertake together.” (1)
- “We detail the importance of practices that transform our everyday lives – such as practising solidarity, support, care, theorising and embodied transformation – in the dismantling of forms of duress faced by trans, non-binary, gender non-conforming, and queer people (especially in the context of other intermeshing marginalisations). In this, this book intends to shift trans, queer, feminist, and anti-racist dialogues, and understandings of oppression away from identity by emphasising the importance of what we do, and how and why we do it, towards the (re)making of our lives, together.” (1)
#### Transfeminism, Ethics, and Collectives
- “We describe collective making of forms of life as _**ethics**_, which is the way futures manifest – through building and maintaining the worlds and ways of living that enable our existences and our thriving.” (1)
- “Trans life entails actively embodying social change, opting for paths along which one may flourish, even if that means facing harm and challenges. Trans proposes a movement away – an escape – from imposed categories or starting points, which shows trans as creative and collective acts. Transness doesn’t strive for a pre-determined outcome, but takes shape along the way – sensually and relationally.” (1-2)
- “Our **transfeminist ethics** is not defined by forms that cohere through institutions, even if, as we discuss throughout the book, trans life is repeatedly encumbered by institutions. Institutions suggest that the pressures upon trans lives may be solved by inclusion. **Abolitionist approaches, by contrast, help us understand why inclusion is conditional and how we can navigate institutions should we need to, while advocating for other possibilities.** These approaches also require that we think through questions of complicity regarding institutions and the harmful dynamics born out of social hierarchies, reconsidering our agency in their midst.” (2)
- **”Femmeness** is about the stakes of putting oneself out there, of nurturing each other and oneself, knowing that one is an agent of pleasure and possibility in one’s life – even in a world that is willing to use, exploit or destroy you.” (2-3)
- “We propose that trans femme flourishing emerges from abolition, as abolition undoes structures of repression that enable the violence faced by trans femmes… The threat of punishment for not falling into line with norms is an element of patriarchal institutionalism. Violence – locking people out, enclosing people in – is the normative method of wrestling control. Abolition is the opposite, and to address frictions, tensions, and crises without recourse to violence, we need collectivity and community. For H.L.T. Quan, mass movements are a space for friendship, on the road to abolition of violent institutions.” (3)
- “The idea that all members of a community share a commonality of experience… tends to flatten out important nuances and differences between us…” (3)
- “In contrast to neoliberal approaches, collective ones can provide a space to practice and develop actions and skills, modes of expression and desire, informing the direction of our aims while attending to our needs.” (3)
#### Theory for Liberation
- **“Theory has a role in the transformation of the world.** We write in a time of fabricated scarcity, visibly economic but also epistemic (relating to knowledge)... Theory can build bridges across provincialised thought by remaining connected to other ways of living, thinking, and relating. While the local is important for the grounding of understanding, it can demand a sameness that is suffocating. Constellating insights across different localities provides tools and modes of thought, letting theory expand the local because it is a tool to work upon the imagination itself. And in that manner, theory works against patriarchy.” (3-4)
- “… imperial norms rely heavily on generalised and abstract thought. Hegemonic generalisations encompass and traverse a range of contexts to enable long-distance control, as Anibal Quijano explains, while the coloniality of power relies on the institutionalisation of life. **Institutionalisation creates indifference and encourages a contraction of perception through generalisations**: if groups behave ‘the same,’ relations are pre-figured.” (4)
- “Escaping a normative environment relies in part on theory – liberation involves both experience and pattern recognition. The replacement of relationality with generalities, in the forms of norms, policy and generic identity categories, beckons us away from the link between the sensuous and the abstract, which holds the potential for new forms of living. Thus, we make a strong case for theory and analytical approaches that are scaled up from immediate bodily being.” (4-5)
- “As a book on abolitionist ethics, its voice is embodied, because ethics is action combined with thought. Mixing personal, theoretical, and embodied styles, we aim to show that a multiplicity of voices can speak a more complete truth.” (5)
- “This scarcity \[of collective social spaces for the exploration of possibility] reflects the austerity of a Global North, European context in which we write, in which publics are told that there is no money or space (or jobs) despite over 500 years of global colonial extraction, dispossession, exploitation, and accumulation that has enriched Europe. Theory is one way to make up for the loss of social and embodied space. It is not a replacement of other social spaces, but an addition to them. **We need tools to reflect and reimagine how we will build and make our lives without recourse to systems that don’t serve us**, nor the majority of people on this planet. Caught between the falsity of the promise of inclusion and the reality of disposability, between medical violence and niche possibilities, **flourishing requires thought about actions and activities, rather than prioritizing knowledge and understanding. Flourishing requires possibilities for conversation and political imagination, but more importantly, to highlight how we can relate to each other.”** (5)
- “At the time of writing, we are witnessing and participating in the largest social movement of this generation – the movement for, and in solidarity with, the liberation of Palestine… Yet as the war in Gaza rages on, we see the dynamics of a growing social movement and the relationships that are forged. The movement spreads knowledge about the historical dispossession and struggles, the cultures and lives of the Palestinian people; and knowledge is created in encampments, marches, blockades, and organising for boycotts, divestment, and sanctions. International law… are unable to block the ongoing violence against Palestinians, which underlines for us: **abolition is anti-colonial, anti-military, and anti-border.”** (5-6)
### Chapter 1 ‘They would plant the rose garden themselves’: Femme, complicity, and the rewiring of the sensuous
- “Throughout the book, we discuss how – in the face of duress – solidarity, friendship, political actions, and creativity between queer and trans femmes and folks more broadly create spaces for openness and becoming. We understand this as **world-making or worlding.** In a world different senses of meaning, history, people, narratives, and insights are brought together. A world doesn’t need to be complete, but it is lived and shared. With such practices in mind, we theorise femme as anti-institutional and as embodied institutional critique.” (8-9)
- “Furthermore, white femininity and feminism often relies on tropes of innocence and neutrality to maintain relationships with institutions – even those that work to contain feminism’s transformative potential. However, **by bringing femmeness into dialogue with abolitionist thinking, we propose an ethics that embraces complicity** instead. This ethics centres sociality as a mode of self-understanding that guides one’s actions, uprooting (neo)liberal attitudes that try to evade friction by doling out punishment and exclusion. Instead of reforming the structures of oppression, femme encourages us to unlearn and uproot demands that reproduce social and material oppressions, to open ourselves up to social and sensorial transformation, and to take agency over the (re)construction and nourishment of our own worlds – to plant the rose garden of struggle for liberation ourselves.” (9)
#### Changing Femme
- “In the meeting between trans and femme – the movement from a presupposed or assigned position within the gender binary towards something else; and a sexual identity that understands femininity as a source of power and agency – femme draws elements of femininity out of the gravitational field of racialised gender norms, severing them from their overdetermination within the gender binary and compulsory heteronormativity. This includes conceptualising, understanding, and practising femininity without it appearing as the polar opposite of masculinity.” (9)
- “Femmes shape different socialities that give forms to worlds they want to live in… draw\[ing] impurely from the possibilities of nonnormativity… we argue that to be attenuated to new forms invites curiosity, openness, and a willingness to face frictions… Becoming is not abstract, but active and practical, and we come to know ourselves with the aid of others.” (10)
- "...we understand **femme as a practice, or way of life, that is necessarily open to sociality**, regardless of gender. Femme in our formulation holds openness to change as a core element." (10)
- "...we wish to dissolve a reductive idea of a singular trans femme body - *a* body that is legibly and visibly trans, in public or in private. **Trans femme embodiments exist in a vast multiplicity** - inflected by race, ability, sexuality, size, health, and access to healthcare. These elements, alongside our experiences, are all woven into our flesh, elements we carry into our constitution. In a world where transsexuality is primarily medicalised, access to hormones, surgeries and other treatments appear to be the most defining factors for trans embodiment; and while access to healthcare obviously influences one's bodily being, this alone does not define trans femininity." (10)
- "To succumb our bodily being to healthcare is to sacrifice our agency to medicine, and to its manifestations as medical industrial complex and administrative violence... Our bodies are shaped by our labour, by our education, and much more." (10-11)
- "By stating that **social change is embodied**, we claim our ensouled bodyminds as contextual, and sociality as the mode we draw on to navigate our surroundings... Knowledge is fluid and means different things in different contexts. Becoming is not 'rooted' in a single self-centred subjectivity - the modernist appeal for self-knowledge as knowledge about one's place in the world - but it is a practical process, in relation, that relies on contextual arrangements to learn what needs to be known..." (11)
- "**Subcultural femininities** find their roots in a veritable mix of working-class queer bar cultures, Black and Brown ballroom cultures, minoritised ethnic cultures that have relocated and creolised, punk and goth subcultures, fandom focused on anime, graphic arts and illustration, queer perversions, and readings of Bollywood and adjacent cinemas (to identify a few). These subcultural contexts mix cultural production and performance, appropriating capital-intensive commodified culture, to bring together visual and cultural aesthetics to enact transformations, dreams and desires of gender. This creates expressions, experimentations and encodings of femininity that constellate socialities. Across such different contexts, we hold and share space for emotions (from the joyous to the difficult), creating opportunities to share skills, inspire looks, and fantasies, to dress up and glimmer." (11-12)
- "Desire is central to this... Foregrounding generosity and reciprocity in communal contexts invites one to leave norms behind, to go deep with desires, flesh out fantasies, shift postures, and open oneself and one's world to change. The work of femmes teaches that committing to vibrancy (literally the vibration of the ensouled bodymind), care, and solidarity is necessary." (12)
- "Desire is informed by sensuous and affective explorations, which vary in different contexts and relations. Desire is informed by safety and unsafety, by the possibility of making a getaway, or by inclusion into categories of desirability or relegation to ornamentation. Trans femmes face the desires of others which may come with undesirable curiosity. Yet at other times, desire translates into expressions of openness and into play." (12)
- "...we find ways of relating that support navigating environments to influence our being in the world otherwise. We entangle with each other, and we engender each other. in that mix of affirmation, resistance, and repulsion we make forms that hold our responsibility to each other carefully and with nuance. In this not knowing who *exactly* we are, what *exactly* we strive for, we find experiments of desire, affect, and meaning that are nevertheless grounded, material, and collective... with a futurity that starts today, not in a promise of a better tomorrow." (14)
- "And we live with the question of how do you relate to us? Who am I for you?... These questions profoundly invert the more masculine, at times policy-oriented question of 'how shall I relate to you?' That question wants answers about pronouns and pronunciations of names, while not addressing the empowerment of certain subjects... The question is devoid of curiosity, invested instead in attempting to control a situation and leave oneself intact by harvesting some knowledge without vulnerability. Such is not our \[femme] life." (14)
- "Institutional psychiatry and the Gender Clinic have historically only been interested in facilitating transition for trans women who display femininity that can be assimilated into a white, cis-normative, fand heteronormative womanhood, which psychiatry conceives of as entailing sexual passivity; and for trans men who commit to masculinity and its expectations in work and life - for example to not become pregnant... And white Western capitalist cultures have also been historically invested in visions of femininity as meekness, passivity, and oriented towards consumption, a gender expression opposed to a strong, virile, and empowered masculinity. (14-15)
- "Within these communal contexts, femmes open up possibilities for how one connects with their body, dissolving the alienation of overdetermined binary expressions of gender, and the disconnections of isolating labour. Coming into the body emerges with the lifting of dysphoria (which is not merely the domain of pathologised transsexuals). Femme power emerges both at the level of one's body and in a communal/collective context, and these are interlinked." (15)
#### Femme in the Collective
- "Through femme lives, through our friendships in the everyday, through the projects we forge, join and establish, we build collective power. At a social level, we check in on each other, on bodies and feelings, chemicals and processes, activities and relationships. We compare notes and experiences. We encourage self-expression in others, to experiment and try out looks, lives, desires. Through this, queer and trans and non-binary femmes forge and reaffirm bonds, friendships, relations, reaching out to hold differences and commonalities together. We create space to share, to eat together, and cry with each other; to support and feel through the denigration and harm we (have) experience(d). We begin to scheme, to plot together, to organise on the smallest of levels (making art or food or clothes or zines) to the largest (building infrastructure and collectives). We life each other up, celebrate big and small victories... of living in spite of racial capitalism. We hold up the joys of bodies, even if bodies are also sometimes hard to bear. We check in on healing; we build care teams to aid recoveries." (15-16)
- "In the face of both economic *and* cultural austerity - femmes (femmes of colour in particular) pursue/embrace a sense of opulence, abundance and luxury, embellishing the worlds we've made together. The turn outward to build joy, fun, desire, sensuality, together, comes with a turn inward to work through difficult emotions around our sense of self, our bodies, our desire, casting off shame or turning it into an aspect of sexual agency." (16)
- "In contrast to the controlling norms of feminisation, that may confront trans femmes, especially in periods of transition, we recognise femme collective becoming in the appreciation, encouragement, gestures, and support that nudge us to embrace each other and brace for the world in unspoken scripts of solidarity." (17)
- "To refuse these impositions \[of institutions and norms], **femme prioritises relationality as attentiveness, as care, as way to openness. We work to oppose the abandonment and disposability of other marginalised peoples**, as an abolitionist praxis, emerging in part from our own experiences of abandonment and disposability... We learn to recognise the problems and patterns that occur in institutional contexts... and also in communities and in our social relations, problems that may reinforce the denigration of femmes, of our work or of our love. But we also trace our own complicities." (18)
- "In a political climate that is structure by intertwined xenophobia and institutional rights discourses, disposability is clearly visible on a national level through austerity and the response to the coronavirus pandemic... We are hesitant to give up the sociality that we forged in nonnormative contexts, including the context of having had minimal rights. Entering institutions as full citizens demands compliance with structures that work against the solidarities that emerge in struggle. So we hesitate at the threshold of the institutions on which we are dependent..." (18)
- "The idea of moral and epistemological perfection claims its own innocence and untouchability, and is detached from the context in which life is made; its lack of relation makes it prone to indifference, because it is fundamentally unsocial. Femmes sit with our complicit entanglements, facing the everyday mess that we navigate. **The refusal of perfection leads to a refusal of innocence, and an embrace of sociality.**" (19)
- "Women and LGBT people can also be guardians of the norm, often the price of inclusion - policing other women, queers, femmes and other feminised people, especially when it comes to race." (19)
- "Femme is the stance when one didn't get domesticated by the norm, or maybe got broken by the norm, and emerges in consciously refusing alignment with it. In this split from the norm, femme femininities become unrecognisable and illegitimate, as they no longer draw on tropes of servitude and objectification. Femme femininities are not *for* the norm, but in defiance of it. It is the norm that, on the one hand, renders femmes invisible, unable to perceive what is considered perverse, and on the other hand affirms particular days of year for visibility... where it is paying attention via algorithms." (19-20)
- "The emotional work of care forms a sociality that subtends the public realm. Caring for other dispossessed people - other queer and trans folks, other marginalised people, the people that we build friendships and life with - shapes a more agential position. **Care is about supporting each other's survival, towards flourishing. Thus, we don't want to give up care, because care is a mutual relation - what we give up is servitude.**" (20)
#### Femme Sexuality
- "Our communities and collectives exist under conditions of precarity, being overworked and under-employed, struggling with rent and crowdfunding healthcare. We repeatedly face social and institutional contexts where our self-expression, ideas, labour, and forms of being ae dismissed, devalued, exploited, or abused. Nat has described this elsewhere as the conditions of **transfeminine brokenness**. In addition, structural and historical forces of racism and white supremacy find their way into the social ecologies of queer and trans life. In both institutional and social contexts, transmisogynoir and whorephobia may run Black and Brown trans femmes out of town - these are easier to pinpoint in social interactions, but more difficult to identify in the often more shielded domain of sexuality." (20-21)
- "Anti-Black racism feeds social anxieties regarding sexuality, manifesting on structural and interpersonal levels. It affects the very possibility of private life for Black and interracial relationships; it manifests intellectually when the writing of Black feminists on sexuality is left on the shelf to gather dust, or not integrated into analysis of feminist sexual practices that emerged during the sex wars. Holland argues that the autonomous desiring subject posited in queer theory is implicitly encoded as white, male, and we would add cis and able-bodied; and that the conditions of desiring for Black queer females are imbricated in familiar forms where (heteronormative) social and sexual reproduction can't as easily be laid by the wayside. The same could be used to describe South Asian family norms, although there is also a marginal history in which queer women couples might fit into these forms, particularly in lower and middle castes." (21)
- "... the imaginary that progress for LGBTQ people comes through reforming conservative social forms by recognition of legal rights encodes whiteness in a manner that may not transfer to ethnic or diasporic communities, and which in turn affects the expectations place upon Black, Brown and other minority ethnic queer and trans femmes." (21)
- "Rodríguez describes how women of colour have faced sexual sacrifice through shame and censure, encouraged to forego pleasure for 'communal respectability' and 'the common good'. She points to how non-reproductive sexual activities have faced pathologisation and criminalisation, while women of colour and disabled people have also been subjected to eugenic practices and sterilisation. Negotiating the tensions of sexuality and social respectability, amidst state policing and the control of bodies, is a challenge of inventing practices... supported by generously sharing knowledge and speaking into silence, with the need to steadfastly develop verbal and non-verbal means of communication. Rodríguez speaks vividly of the roles of gesture, dance and fantasy in service of this." (21-22)
- "Sexuality is a key element of coming to know one's body, from learning and understanding sensations, pleasures, and difficulties, to undoing the norms and expectations of social conservatism and shame. This is part of the reason why conservative and neoliberal political programmes work ideologically to suppress and control knowledge and expressions of sexuality (often under the guise of protecting vulnerable people and minors)." (22)
- "**The neoliberal era of LGBTQ Rights has also worked to keep sexual expression and deviance in the home and behind closed doors**, unless it involves sex work (where we see pushes towards criminalising sex workers or clients, and making working conditions more risky for sex workers) or the sexual expression of Black, Brown and Indigenous people (who still get policed, harmed, and sometimes killed in the privacy of their/our homes)." (22-23)
- "When it comes to discourses around transness, the push for respectability and assimilation has left sexuality out of the equation... Moreover, this was in the context of active pathologisation of trans desire and sexuality by psychiatry since the mid-twentieth century... Shifting the conversation to rights (trans people's marital rights and legal gender recognition) overshadowed everyday conversations about sexuality, about abortion, and, initially, about getting pregnant. Like queer liberalism before it, the sanitised reframing of trans and non-binary folks might make some of us more respectable, but often at the expense of those of us who wear our sexualities upon our sleeves, or those of us who wear our sexualities upon our sleeves, or those of us who are objectified an hyper-sexualised (most often Black and Brown trans women and other trans people of colour)." (23)
- "We are well aware that sanitised contemporary trans representation, the hypersexualisation and objectification of trans women within pornography aimed at men, and the lack of discourse around trans sexuality outside of queer and trans zine culture have real material effects upon us. Cultural imaginaries do affect how desirable and datable other people find us, and this in turn affects our positions within economies of care." (23)
- "Sex is not about *what* is in your underwear; it's about sensation, play, being cognisant of pleasure, but also discomfort and hang-ups, too. Intersex and trans people are more interested in emphasising the diversity of genitals, rather than obsessing over and fetishising them or classifying them according to a binary. The sexual short courses on how to be touched and how not, and gently explaining where to lube, when to undress, consent, and all of this tactfully while not breaking the sexual atmosphere, can be disheartening or depressing, or fun and exhilarating - whether it is, is often a matter of skill and trust." (24)
- "**T4t relationality** - that is trans people desiring, dating, and having sex with other trans people - can contribute to undoing the norms which mark certain trans bodies as undesirable, unspooling desire from cis-normative standards of beauty and attractiveness, proposing different sexual practices, and potentially different life goals and vectors of futurity. Grounded in the sweetness of a commonality of trans experience or of trans and queer subcultures... Beauty and desire look and feel different, sometimes ditching the 'classical' standards of feminine or masculinity completely; relationships become  space of opportunities for expression and play, where assuredness, presence, and pleasure may have previously been denied or neglected. T4t relationality affirms that trans lives entail explorations and shifts in one's life direction, or temporal disruptions, when compared with normative bourgeois life trajectories of growth, age and change - as sexual and gender orientations and bodies can change, and such change requires time and energy." (24)
- "While in queer relationships, an interplay of femme and butch dynamics is not overdetermined by gender expression, t4t can emphasize the creative character of sexual dynamics even more. When it comes to sex, queer erotics involving the whole body connect to a  multiplicity of orifices, appendages, prosthetics, and genitals too. Touch becomes a practice (or method) of exploring what is exciting or pleasurable. Consent remains important; and sometimes pain becomes part of the mix too..." (25)
- "Language and gesture, both verbal and non-verbal, can become means of (re)coding and (re)inscribing bodies according to what is felt and desired... There is no singular trans femme embodiment, as with other trans and non-binary embodiments. "(25)
- "Femmeness encourages us to approach sex as agents of our own pleasure and care... Sex requires vulnerability as well as experimentation. We learn the centrality of negotiating consent with partners and in play; to make safer conditions of risk and care. We recognise the reparative power in sexual practices - to challenge abjection, shame, dysphoria, and dissonance - where we are able to negotiate and work with presence and (dis)comfort with our bodies..." (25)
- "Sex requires check-ins. Our trauma interrupts us in unexpected ways. A guiding touch can bring us back. We get lost and find our way to return. Simultaneously we hold our partners and navigate their history and interruptions, transforming the norms that were enforced upon our bodies to make play a healing escape, a revisitation, and a mode of comforting each other." (25)
- "With an emphasis on openness - to deep knowledge, to living and being otherwise, to connect into reciprocal relations of care - femme holds open space to tune into, share and shift towards one's desires. We propose that the emotional space for desiring is one that depends upon care - upon having one's *needs* met - in the first instance... Where pleasure is not subjugated to the demands of activism against the structures that attempt to overpower us, pleasure can be a source of energy and bonding for this activism." (26)
#### Complicity and Friction, in and between Collectives
- "**Community** is used in many different ways, but we understand it to mean a social group where there is something that group members have in common, but one doesn't necessarily know everyone. **Collectives**, on the contrary, exist through direct relations between people. It is a term that emerges for us from let-wing organising or the squat movement. Collectives are often horizontally organised; and working with frictions in collectives is a key part of learning to organise. This includes dealing with finding oneself the problem, without lapsing into guilt, defending ignorance, or hoping for a world in which innocence is an option." (26-27)
- "We think about **complicity**, because we live in worlds in which we are interlinked in many ways - not all of them voluntary, consensual or desired. We enter into worlds that are imposed on us, such as the economically Hostile Environment that forces us into jobs we might not want. In this world, we may need to display professional behaviour that we do not consent to... or be instructed to align with institutional demands that we cannot always stop... In doing the work of uprooting structures that enclose us in harmful ways, we need to attend to the way these structures find form within us and in our collectives." (27)"
- "We do not undertake this work from a critical distance, but primarily through making different forms of life... In these forms of living otherwise, we find pleasure and joy where we meet, love, have sex, organise, and make sense of what matters." (27)
- "The issue of complicity presents itself in both institutional settings, and in situations where we act collectively." (28)
- "Multiplicities of experience muddle such categorical homogeneity and disrupt a politics of purity. Assuming identities are homogenous allows for clear policies and rules that require no relational approaches. Decontexualising allows rules that create the appearance of a grip on reality. Rules soon become the reality, and contexts and collectives disappear under rules, norms, and polciies, satisfying a craving for stability. Even well-intended guidelines can substitute imagined realities for lived experiences, and in the process homogenise groups and give those who adhere to rules a false sense of, what we would call exaggeratedly, innocence. Innocence suggests one is not creating limits for others, not limiting oneself." (29)
- "Social or institutional regulations can provide a false sense of security because they exist at a remove from the socialities that make reality sticky, and murky and thereby needing attentiveness. Rules in this sense allow for organisational speed and crowd control. They also individualise action, because if you stick to the rules, you are not guilty. Institutional policies claim to protect staff that follow their protocols, regardless of the violence they may dispense, which is especially clear in policing, armies, and internment but also medical ethics. However, **the structure of rules is not only present inside institutions, but also outside of them.** We see it in everyday interactions that are undoubtedly streamlined by, say, the regulatory ethos encouraged by social media." (29-30)
- "Debarati Sanyal explains complicity as being folded into a situation - not standing on the sidelines... but rather a all to action and shared responsibility for a situation (and how it might be changed). This combines with the attentiveness at the heart of our transfeminism - highlighting forms of care that not only attend to needs, reproduction, or survival, but also to a reality to ensure it is not curbed by discursive categories. Such attentiveness is saturated with the possibilities of exchange that occur in close proximity." (30)
- "Thinking about complicity helps us, on the one hand, to see positionality as a marker that determines the demands of hegemonic structure on our lives, and on the other hand, indicates how our becoming and our politics shape our understandings, relations, relatability, and attention... Thinking through complicity reminds us of the struggles of past generations, to counter the normalisation (and depoliticisation) we have arrived at." (30)
- "We also claim that **we are part of the problem because other people make us the problem.** We bring social problems into situations... It makes no sense to claim the problem is merely 'elsewhere' and we are 'innocent;' of it... We are not exculpated of any given problem, our **culpability** is something that needs to be navigated." (30-31)"
- "Rather, in social justice work we are collectively responsible for the ways we interact, even if it means that we cannot always solve the problems emerging directly in specific interactions. It means honouring the enormous amounts of labor it takes to create trust in collectives." (31)
- "Neoliberalism disrupts trust in collectives, and a lack of relational skills can lead to breakdowns in communities... Friction indicates points where worlds do not overlap. Some members of a group may be aware that their needs are deviating from this particular collective - sometimes because of their overlaps with other groups, or since they come with different histories and needs." (31)
- "There is no withdrawing into a form of life which allows us to avoid structural problems. The problems of trans life... inhibit simple ways of coping. This defies the frictionless policy-based hopes of liberalism. To embrace complicity is to interrupt the space-making practices imposed by normative binary gendering. Binary norms pair transgression and agency with victimisation and passivity. Due to the passive nature of the 'victim', or so the story goes, an external force is required to intervene and protect the innocent harmed one. Innocence introduces force, and force demands allegiance with power: this is why the performance of innocence is necessary. It is the renewal of the bond with institutionalised force. The entire model of individualisation retains the structure that requires the existence of perpetrators, police, and judgements. Centring complicity as sociality, as conspiracy, dashes the liberal hope for a frictionless space of innocence. For liberals, such a space promotes adherence to a single order and creates the policing function of management: hierarchy and control are required elements, introducing coercion for some, and a smooth ride for those in charge." (31-32)
#### Tensions Threading Fabrics of Worlds - Complicity and Solidarity
- "...liberation does not lead to a friction-free existence. In a world that is multiple, collisions form the building blocks of new forms." (32)
- "There are two sides to our thinking about complicity. First is finding the right relation to your position in the world... It entails attending to where one is, and what one can do from that place. From that contextualisation, one can determine when one is responsible for stepping in, for creating/supporting collective resistance, or contributing ideas to the collective domain. The right relation is not quite the same as positionality. Where positionality refers to a structural situatedness, **the right relation is directional, applying agency from where one is.** Femme relational approaches avoid conflating the various layers of life with a general structure, in part by being attentive to socialities." (33)"
- "In white responses to structures of duress, one's relation to one's position in the world is often interrelated with guilt, but finding the right relation is more interesting than that." (33)
- "Finding the right relation entails questioning roles and practices in a communal context. Focusing on practices connects embodied action with (liberating) imaginaries, rather than hiding actions under structuring rules, claiming that the rule is the problem and denying translation of rules into actions. An embodied approach that links action, knowledge and forms has been termed a somatechnical approach. **Somatechnics** means a reliance on ways of relating that are held communally and bodily. In this context that means placing one's being amidst modes of relating that support the collective. While rules rely on generalising terms that traverse different contexts, relations are in flux and differences are always situational. Relationality is contextual, whereby differences not only remain intact but can even flourish. Attention to context, including structural and generalising pressures, enables thinking about complicity by delineating relations that might not be emancipatory..." (33)
- "The second, more positive side of thinking through complicity centres openness to alliances, friction and arguments, a readiness to question the organisation of practices. This openness to tensions informs a view of the structure of relations. In rule-guided organisations, tension signifies a breakdown. In collectives, to embrace tension, the possibility emerges of enhancing openness. Embracing complicity without guilt gives room for experiment, play, embellishment, and new senses of joy. A willingness to change without guilt or defensiveness can dissolve the hostilities that are sometimes present across fault lines." (34)
- "Friction in collectives highlights not necessarily tensions between hegemony or normativity and nonnormativity, but the points where collectives close themselves off from making connections... Being open to acknowledging such complicities is a starting point for addressing difficult tensions - they are not solved simply by an analysis of social hierarchy (even if that can play a role). Working with and through tensions... is less a set of critical actions that clear up misunderstandings in the existing order, such as rule-based accounts purport to do, as it is a sensuous opening to ways of worlding." (34)
- "Sometimes, the disconnect in marginalised bodies occurs from being out of sync with, or overwhelmed by, one's context or surroundings. In complex collectives, these differences cannot necessarily be 'solved'. Simultaneously, such disconnect may indicate where we need to hold on - to invoke Denise Ferreira de Silva - to be different without reproducing separability. Holding differences can be exhilarating and inspiring, can enhance understanding and complexity, and can keep open spaces when homogeneity would close them." (34-35)
#### Care in the Collective Worlds - Receiving Labour, Offering Generosity
- "Yet, to focus on agency alone in remaking ways of worlding misses that there are also other tensions at stake. A lot of people want to give, but don't want to receive... People join collectives... because they are ready to be supportive, but while joining they rely either on a private structure of care or will never ask for help. This lack of mutuality can reaffirm the racial and gendered divisions of labour under capitalism that structured care - where marginalised Black, Indigenous, brown, feminised, disabled, trans, queer and/or migrant people bear the burden of much of the world's care work in waged and institutional relations, and in social relations. Those who are less marginalised amid these relations will also need less care. **Self-sufficiency is an enduring mythical aspiration of racial capitalism** - which itself depends on material relations that are interrelated across the globe, relations that reproduce unequal divisions of labour, the exploitation of people, labour, land, 'natural resources' and more, all of which are rooted in colonial dispossession. The drive to support others from a position of self-sufficiency, while either refusing or seemingly not needing to receive care, reproduces a dynamic of philanthropy - 'I am "generous" with the wealth/capital/labour/skills I have accumulated (or hoarded) and will do good or fund activities to reproduce the world as I see it (from my colonial bourgeois imperialist position)'. Affluent white people (those who have resources) in organisations or collectives run to 'solve' problems (that is, throw money/time at these problems while not addressing their structural causes), reproducing this dynamic of white supremacy." (35-36)
- "Working in large groups with a communal structure is not for everybody. A lot of time is spent talking to create space for decision-making; to make such spaces work as  a whole, there's a lot of unacknowledged femme labour in the background. The collective is made in the 'little work' of femme labour... Giving can be about giving attention, rather than sharing insights, and receiving is equally about receiving words as it is about finding an attentive ear." (36)
- "If femme labour or care is not present or has been driven out, organisations become a different kind of structure: they may cohere into a centralised structure, or decisions become forms of power play. Sometimes it is better if a group disbands itself and ceases to be. Sociality helps to band together *and* to disband collectives." (36)
- "María Lugones explains hegemony as a world where 'his sense is the only sense'. Moving away from this logic of purity - that is a logic of control - we step into a sense of being able to let go of what we bring, stalling it, to pick it up later perhaps. We are looking to allow the gaps in our experience to support mutuality, with the right kind of openness to what we don't know (rather than the 'right kind of knowledge'). Learning what we don't know requires engaged listening and reflecting on what might be overlooked in a collective. Embracing such attentiveness is an act of resistance, as Lugones has laid out, when she names it a 'social commentary'." (36-37)
- "Femme practices do not lean on a single order of being in the world: they are not singly logical, sensorial, or affective. Different connections are made and grow into new practices. The refusal to reduce worlding to a single sense (e.g. the visual or the logical) allows worlding to become 'luxurious'. This luxuriousness, opulence, or abundance is an openness to meaning and connection. Conversely, singular, normative approaches frame themselves with scarcity, as purifying practices restrict the cross-pollination of worlds, creating competition between explanations, understanding and points of view. When one's world consists of a single logic, one is asked to give up all one has; but in a world saturated with an abundance of connections, such generosity is merely a way to renew one's sense of connection. It (almost) doesn't matter what logic I bring - int he moment I start to *impose* it, I become the problem. The moment one is ready to dissolve a single order, complicity becomes complexity." (37)
#### Returning Intuitions and Rewiring the Sensuous
- "Neoliberalism is a politics of indifference that strengthens authoritarian structures, reinforcing commodified institutional logics." (37)
- "Femme embellishment taps into playful and serious sensual awareness, encouraging shifts in one's focus and staying open to the world." (38)
- "Gloria Anzaldúa indicates that it is usually the ego which commands the focus of the senses. This commanding focus gets generalised into 'common sense', leading to actions that reproduce dominant structures. Responsibility requires the difficult acknowledgment that one's intuition about how to do things may at times be wrong. **Rewiring the sensuous entails a retuning of the intuitive.** The rewiring is (in part) conscious, involving presence and gentleness - and it undoes the essentialist idea that intuition is a singular thing. Furthermore, intuition is an important part of not being alienated from oneself. One does not 'have' an intuition - intuition emerges from one's connection to environments, and how one interplays with the world." (38)
- "Transness is a different hunger... a hunger for a life not lived yet, that we are rehearsing in the underground." (38)
- "The retuning of intuition may be conceived as one aspect of a rewiring of the sensuous that femmeness inaugurates. Through institutional critique and decoloniality; embracing the lines of attention and flight that come with queer and trans femme desires... through the worlds and ways of life we forge and hold together; to the ways we collectivise our care labour for the remaking of our ensouled bodyminds and somatechnics, refusing the disposability of marginalised bodies; to the politicised aesthetics and joy we derive from our deep recognition and embrace of rogue, abject, and/or high femininity. We come to know the politics in our queer desires that draw out attention otherwise." (39)
# Tags
#ASivandan #abolition #abolitionistethics #administrativeviolence #AnibelQuijano #Anti-Blackness #assimilation #anticolonial #bodymind #collective #collective/decision-making #collectives #community #complicity #DebaratiSanyal #DeniseFerreiradeSilva #desire #disposability #disposabilityculture #ElizabethMarston #embodiedtransformation #embodiment #epistemology #feminism #femininities #femininity #femme #femme/practice #femmeness #FredMoten #genderoppression #GloriaAnzaldúa #HLTQuan #healthcare/disparities #healthcaredisparities #identitypolitics #ImmanuelKant #intuition #JoséEstebanMuñoz #JoshuaChambers-Letson #JuanaMaríaRodríguez #KaiChengThom #KirstenRoss #knowledge #LeahLakshmiPiepzna-Samarasinha #MaríaLugones #medical-industrialcomplex #MichelFoucalt #MijkeVanDerDrift #NatRaha #neoliberalism #neoliberalism/innocence #neoliberalism/queerassimilation #neoliberalism/queerness #perfectionism #relationality #SeanBonney #sexuality #SharonPatriciaHolland #sociality #somatechnics #StuartHall #T4T #trans/embodiment #trans/feminism #trans/femininity #trans/sexuality #trans/sociality #transembodiment #transfeminism #transfeminism/attentiveness #transfemininities #transfemininity #transliberation #transmisogynoir #transness #transsexuality #whitesupremacy #whorephobia #world-building #worldbuilding #worlding
# Works Referenced
References to other authors and writings…
- H.L.T. Quan (3)
- Anibal Quijano (4)
- Michel Foucalt (4)
- Immanuel Kant (4)
- María Lugones (4, 33, 36)
- Denise Ferreira de Silva (4, 35)
- Juana María Rodríguez (15, 21)
- Fred Moten (18)
- Elizabeth Marston (19)
- Sharon Patricia Holland (21)
- Debarati Sanyal (27, 30)
- Kai Cheng Thom (27, 31)
- Leah Lakshmi Piepzna-Samarasinha (35-36)
- José Esteban Muñoz (37)
- Joshua Chambers-Letson (37)
- Gloria Anzaldúa (37)
- A. Sivanandan (38)
- Stuart Hall (38)
- Sean Bonney (39)
- Kirsten Ross (39)