Kuijpers, Suzanne M E, Chantal M Wiepjes, Elfi B Conemans, Alessandra D Fisher, Guy T'Sjoen, and Martin den Heijer. "Toward a Lowest Effective Dose of Cyproterone Acetate in Trans Women: Results from the ENIGI Study". The Journal of Clinical Endocrinology & Metabolism 14, no. 10 (2021): e3936-e3945, [https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC8571811/](https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC8571811/)

An exploration of lowest effective cyproterone acetate (CPA) dose in trans women to achieve results while minimizing side effects.
## Abstract
### Context
"Cyproterone acetate (CPA) is a competitive inhibitor of the androgen receptor and exerts negative hypothalamic feedback. It is often used in combination with estrogens in trans women to achieve feminization. However, CPA has been associated with side effects such as changes in liver enzyme concentrations and increases in prolactin concentrations. The question is whether the testosterone-lowering effect, as well as these side effects, are dose dependent."
### Objective
"To assess the lowest effective dose of CPA in trans women to prevent side effects."
### Methods
This study was conducted at gender identity centers in three cities in the Netherlands and "is part of the European Network for the Investigation of Gender Incongruence (ENIGI), a multicenter prospective cohort study. Participants were trans women (n = 882) using estrogens only or in combination with 10, 25, 50, or 100 mg CPA daily. The primary outcome measure. was the concentration of testosterone at 3 and/or 12 months of hormone therapy."
### Results
- "All doses of CPA resulted in testosterone concentrations below the predefined threshold of suppression of 2 nmol/L..."
- "Higher prolactin and lower high-density lipoprotein concentrations were observed with increasing doses of CPA. No differences in liver enzyme concentrations were found between the doses."
### Conclusion
"Compared with higher doses of CPA, **a daily dose of 10 mg is equally effective in lowering testosterone concentrations in trans women, while showing fewer side effects.**"
## Introduction
- "A widely used anti-androgen in Europe is cyproterone acetate (CPA). The anti-androgenic effects of CPA are mainly caused by competitively blocking the androgen receptor... Furthermore, CPA has an anti-gonadotropic effect causing a decrease in the secretion of luteinizing hormone (LH) and follicle-stimulating hormone (FSH). As CPA is a progestogen, it also shows progestogen-like effects, such as changes in lipid metabolism."
- "Historically, CPA has been used in the treatment of prostate cancer, hypersexuality, and hirsutism. The first studies on effects of CPA in trans women were published in the 1980s by [[1989-TSMortality+Morbidity|Asscheman et al]] and Gooren et al. After CPA was introduced in trans women, serious health concerns were raised regarding increases in prolactin concentrations, changes in liver enzymes, changes in lipid concentrations, and increases in the prevalence of thrombosis. Recently, concerns have been raised about the development of meningiomas in long-term use of high cumulative doses of CPA."
- "Besides treatment with CPA, **other anti-androgen treatment options** for trans women **include the use of spironolactone and gonadotropin-releasing hormone (GnRH) agonists.**"
- "A recent study by Pappas et al showed that **spironolactone in combination with high doses** (ie, median dose of 6 mg/day) **of estrogens** resulted in suppressed testosterone concentrations. However, no data have been presented on the side effects of these high doses of estrogens. At initiation of spironolactone use and with subsequent dose alterations potassium checks are recommended. Therefore, use of spironolactone needs to be monitored more closely. However, opposite to CPA, spironolactone as an adjunct anti-androgen agent has not been associated with increases in prolactin concentrations."
- "**GnRH agonists** initially raise the concentrations of LH and FSH. Over time, however, the overstimulation of the hypothalamic-pituitary-gonadal axis leads to decreases in LH and FSH concentrations, subsequently leading to a decline in testosterone concentrations. Unfortunately, unlike CPA and spironolactone, the route of administration of GnRH agonists is through subcutaneous or intramuscular injection, and data on the long-term safety of their use are limited. However long-term safety in patients with precocious puberty or prostate cancer has been researched."
# Tags
#CPA #cyproteroneacetate #FSH #follice-stimulatinghormone #gender-affirmingcare/HRT #gender-affirmingcare/hormonereplacementtherapy #luteinizinghormone #medication/CPA #medication/cyproteroneacetate #medication/progestogen #medication/spironolactone #Netherlands #scientificarticles #scientificjournals 

#unfinished/notes