Kaba, Mariame and Andrea J. Ritchie. *No More Police. A Case for Abolition*. The New Press, 2022. With a foreword by Kandace Montgomery and Miski Noor.
# No More Police. A Case for Abolition
## Foreword
- "May 25, 2020 is a day we will never forget." (xi)
- "Viral Black death meant the world knew about George's murder before Minneapolis got to process, let alone grieve." (xi)
- "In the days that followed, we'd be asked over and over: why is this moment different? We remember thinking that nothing and everything was different. The same cycle of emotions but against the backdrop of a pandemic. People no longer had the regularity of their life patterns, their activities, or their habits to distract them from the truth - the truth that capitalism is failing us, and failing us hard, the truth of the weight of the consistent violence and abuse that Black people experience at the hands of the state." (xii)
- "Organizing can never take credit for the energy and will of the community. What it can do is provide a container to understand the moment and build tower collective solutions to address our individual pain." (xii)
- "We got together with other organizers at Black Visions, a power- and base-building organization we, along with five others, co-founded, and allies at Reclaim the Block, another grassroots justice group in Minneapolis. Within twenty-six hours, we released a petition that demanded the defunding of the Minneapolis Police Department (MPD).
  
  One month of organizing, agitating, and uprisings later, the movement in defense of Black lives achieved one of its first abolitionist wins: a veto-proof majority of the Minneapolis City Council supported an amendment to disband the MPD. The Minneapolis City Council is not particularly radical or visionary, and it was only after weeks of intense, Black-led multiracial organizing that the council was forced to act." (xii)
- "Here in Minneapolis, a commission of unelected bureaucrats blocked the council's recommendation to defund the police. on April 30, 2021, our coalition delivered 21,000 signatures on a people's petition to replace the Minneapolis Police Department with a new Department of Public Safety to the city clerk. On November 2, 2021, over 40 percent of Minneapolis voters supported a ballot amendment that would clear a path for the city to do so by eliminating the requirement in the charter that it maintain a police department. Yet today, the MPD continues to function using millions of taxpayer dollars, while our calls for investment in true public safety have failed to be adopted." (xiii)
- "For us, the journey of political education that led to the demand to defund the police began in 2014, after police in Ferguson, Missouri, killed Michael Brown. Fifteen months later, the Minneapolis police killed Jamar Clark. After the death of Jamar Clark, who was shot by the MPD sixty-one seconds after they approached him, we were part of the response that established a No Cop Zone and the subsequent eighteen-day occupation of the Fourth Precinct police station." (xiii-xiv)
- "At this early stage, our demands were not yet abolitionist. Rather than transform the existing system, we still sought to use its structures, calling for federal and state authorities to release the tape of Clark's killing, for a special prosecutor and not a grand jury to select the charges, and for the Department of Justice to investigate." (xiv)
- "With our allies at Reclaim the Block, our organizing successfully pushed the Minneapolis mayor and city council in 2018 to move $1.1 million away from the police department to programs including a new Office of Violence Prevention that would provide community safety programs without police.
  
  What we did not expect was for the mayor to join with the police the following year to stoke fears about a surge in crime, which was used t justify an $8.3 million increase in the police budget in early 2020. We learned from that pushback." (xv)
- "As the uprising \[following the murder of George Floyd] in the street continued, we worked with allies to push the city council from every side, sending them research, mobilizing their constituents to contact them, and, on May 29, 2020, giving them a twenty-four-hour deadline to sign our petition to defund. When they all failed to do so, we organized an action to leave art in memory of George Floyd in each of their yards. The members of Black Visions created mock tombstones with pictures of George Floyd, flowers, and the message: Defund. Four council members pledged after that. On June 6, 2020, we led a protest march to the home of Mayor Jacob Frey, a timid, play-it-safe politician. Kandace held a microphone to his face and asked a yes-or-no question: Would he commit to defunding the police? When he answered, "I do not support the full abolition of the police," the crowd booed him down.
  
  Video of the confrontation went viral, and the rest of the council soon pledged to defund. On June 26, 2020, the Minneapolis City Council announced that all twelve of its members had voted to disband the police department.
  
  But the devil remained in the details. The next step was to get the defund amendment on the ballot in fall 2020, so the people of Minneapolis could decide. An unelected body of Minneapolis bureaucrats and their pro-police allies stopped our efforts. The fifteen-member Charter Commission, appointed by the county's chief judge, rejected the proposal. While proposals they reject can be put directly on the ballot by the city council or a citizen's initiative, the commission delayed its decision until it was too late fo the proposal to go on the 2020 ballot." (xv-xvi)
- "After the Charter Commission roadblocked the 2020 ballot measure to defund MPD, Black Visions and our allies formed the Yes 4 Minneapolis coalition to renew our fight to bring the issue to voters in November 2021. Unlike the city council proposal, the Charter Commission could not refuse to put our proposed measure on the ballot once we secured the necessary signatures. Having learned from the past, we were prepared for the city council and mayor's office to throw up other obstacles, such as utilizing their power to word the ballot measure to suit their agenda and, if the initiative passed, to write ordinances to interpret the law. We were ready, and successfully fought fo language that would let the people of our city decide what safety looks like for our communities." (xvi)
- "As Ruth Wilson Gilmore says, "Abolition is about presence, not absence. It's about building life-affirming institutions." In designing a plan for a new Department of Public Safety, we've been freedom-dreaming with community partners here in Minneapolis and around the country about what Black liberation will look like practically, in our daily lives.
  
  We spent the eighteen months between the summer of 2020 and the end of 2021 working in the community to expand mental health crisis assistance, to generate resources for healers, elders, clergy, and community leaders to support restorative neighborhood-based practices, and to respond to the needs of our neighbors and loved ones." (xvi)
- "Part of our work has involved something we never would have expected: redistributing money. Before May 25, 2020, we were a tiny organization with Black, queer, and trans leadership, just beginning to talk about decision-making processes and membership growth. After May 25, as donations came in, our budget doubled very quickly, and doubled again, and again. In total, Black Visions and Reclaim the Block received $30 million after our call to defund the MPD. Together with Reclaim the Block, we established an Emergency Fund, which distributed $767,000 in immediate aid to meet the needs of the community reeling from George Floyd's murder and the pandemic, such as rent, health-care costs, and school supplies." (xvii)
- "Not all of the solutions are clear right now; we are learning and innovating as we go. We recognize that the people most harmed by current unjust systems devise the most effective solutions. So we led a People's Movement Assembly process in Minneapolis to define safety together as a community, and continue to lead and explore more ways to center community participation in how we govern our city...
  
  Over the course of the summer of 2021, we moved from small to larger assemblies, in concentric circles of alignment building. The idea, as the Project South People's Movement Assembly Organizing Handbook puts it, is to avoid having a "single leader, organization or predetermined goal" and instead place trust and leadership in the hands of the people who convene to make decisions together." (xvii-xviii)
- ""Defund the police" is a clear rallying call based on an understanding that police and prisons do not keep us safe. It is an economic policy argument that recognizes the role of capital resources in fueling our oppression. And it is a call to budget and policymakers to invest in the care our communities need to create real safety. While Defund is a clear ask, it is not the destination but a step on the path to abolition. Taking away and reallocating capital resources opens the possibility of imagining what individual and community supports need to be in place to realize true and inclusive public safety. Divestment compels us to rethink the role and responsibility of our local, state, and federal governments in truly financing those supports. And it gives us space to center the leadership of Black people and people of color in determining that future." (xviii)
- "In our storytelling about how change happens, we need to talk about the work inb etween hearings, direct actions, and conversations with elected officials. It needs to be common knowledge that we are and must continue to build organizations capable of absorbing new people into our movements, educating them on the interconnectedness of the systems that oppress us, and honing the skills of new leaders.
  
  People need organizations. Organizations need people. We must build political homes, places where our communities can practice self-governance and ways of being with each other that bring in the now what we envision for our society in the future. Organizations are our testing grounds, building our collective capacity to live more liberated lives." (xix)
- "At the same time, people are the bones, blood, and meat of organizations... As we fortify our struggle for the next transformative moment, we also need to create spaces and practices that center care and tend to the humans who fill up our streets or Zoom rooms." (xix)
- "Reflection is a critical piece of the work. Space fo reflection, especially collective reflection, can be rare in movement work. But in the midst of such violence, grief, hope, anxiety, progress, and regression, we must create and demand spaciousness to ask each other, what just happened? What was that like for you? Why did this happen? What are we doing together, and is it working? What does it mean for me to really show up for you, for us? Processing and learning in community is a necessary practice toward fortifying us for the work of building and imagining together. Abolition is a daily practice that is both individual and collective and that grows from holding space for our victories, our defeats, our sorrows, our joys." (xix)
- "****Miski Noor and Kandace Montgomery, Black Visions, February 2022***"
## Other Individuals or Organizations (Mentioned)
- "In the summer and fall of 2017, holding this vision to push transformative change in Minneapolis, we co-founded **Black Visions** with Oluchi Omeoga, Sophia Benrud, Hani Ali, Yolanda Hare, and Ar'Tesha Saballos. We aimed to center our work in healing and transformative justice principles, intentionally developing the organization's "core DNA" to ensure sustainability and develop Minnesota's emerging Black leadership. We called for redirecting funding from police to community-led initiatives, such as support for houseless people, queer and transgender youth, and mental health services." (xiv-xv)
- Reclaim the Block
- Denise Perry
- Adaku Utah
- adrienne maree brown
- Ruth Wilson Gilmore
- Rachel Herzing
- Critical Resistance
- Project NIA
- Yes 4 Minneapolis
- "Our assemblies are inspired by participatory self-governance practices in the U.S. South, in Kurdistan, and by the Zapatistas in Mexico. We've benefited from panels and trainings with Rukia Lumumba, an organizer with the Movement for Black Lives and the Malcolm X Grassroots Movement, who helps organize the Jackson People's Assembly in Jackson, Mississippi; Erica Perry, an organizer of the Black Nashville Assembly; and Mercedes Fulbright, organizing directory with the Texas Working Families Party, who organized People's Assemblies in Dallas in 2020." (xviii)
# Tags
#/2014 #/2018 #/2020 #/2021 #/2022 #abolition #abolition-police #abolition-prison #abolitionistethics #adriennemareebrown #AdakuUtah #AndreaJRitchie #ArTeshaSaballos #BlackNashvilleAssembly #BlackVisions #communitycare #CriticalResistance #DallasTX #DenisePerry #GeorgeFloyd #HaniAli #JacksonMS #JacksonPeoplesAssembly #JamarClark #KandaceMontgomery #Kurdistan #MariameKaba #MercedesFulbright #Mexico #MichaelBrown #Minneapolis #Minnesota #MiskiNoor #Mississippi #Missouri #MovementforBlackLives #mutualaid #OluchiOmeoga #organizing #participatoryself-governance #ProjectNIA #publicsafety #RachelHerzing #ReclaimtheBlock #RukiaLumumba #RuthWilsonGilmore #SophiaBenrud #stateviolence #TexasWorkingFamiliesParty #Yes4Minneapolis #YolandaHare #Zapatistas