Bizic, Marta R, Vladimir Kojovic, Dragan Duisin, Dusan Stanojevic, Svetlana Vujovic, Aleksandar Milosevic, Gradimir Korac, and Miroslav L. Djordjevic. "An Overview of Neovaginal Reconstruction Options in Male to Female Transsexuals." *The Scientific World Journal* **2014** (2014): [external link to article](https://www.academia.edu/164531080/An_Overview_of_Neovaginal_Reconstruction_Options_in_Male_to_Female_Transsexuals?email_work_card=title)

An overview of common surgical options for vaginoplasty with historical notes.
# An Overview of Neovaginal Reconstruction Options in Male to Female Transsexuals
## Abstract
## Introduction
- "The term “transsexual” came into professional and public usage in the 1950’s to denote a person who aspired to or actually lived in the anatomically opposite gender, regardless of whether they had undergone a gender reassignment surgery and/or were undergoing hormonal treatment."
- "There are diﬀerent studies regarding the prevalence of transsexualism in general population accounting for 1 : 7400 to 1 : 42000 in assigned males and 1 : 30040 to 1 : 104000 in assigned females."
- "One of the ﬁrst surgeons, who successfully performed gender reassignment surgery from female to male, and later from male to female, was a plastic surgeon Sir Harold Gillies. Together with Dr. Ralph Millard, he performed a vaginoplasty using the skin ﬂap technique that became the standard for the next few decades."
- "A variety of surgical options exists for vaginal reconstruction. In this article, we review several diﬀerent reconstructive approaches. Regardless of reconstruction method, the goals remain the same: creating a functional and aesthetically acceptable vagina and vulva, with a normal voiding function and satisfactory sexual function."
## Surgical Techniques for Vaginoplasty
### Nongenital Skin Grafts
- "One of the ﬁrst techniques in neovaginal reconstruction in transsexual patients, introduced by \[Felix] Abraham, dates from nineteen thirties and comprises the use of skin graﬅs. In his technique, the skin graﬅ was draped, inside-out, over a sponge placed between the rectum and urethra to serve as a mold... Because of its relative simplicity, this method gained worldwide acceptance."
- "The advantage of nongenital skin graﬅ technique is that it is a single stage procedure, yielding a hairless neovagina of suﬃcient depth and width, with low risk of postoperative complications. The disadvantages include neovaginal prolapse, scarring of the donor area, circular scarring present at the neovaginal introitus, the tendency of the skin graﬅ to shrink, condylomatosis, intraepithelial neoplasia in combination with Human Papilloma Virus (HPV), carcinoma, poor erogenous sensation and absence of natural lubrication."
### Penile Skin Graft
- "Fogh-Andersen was the ﬁrst to report the creation of a neovagina from a full thickness skin graﬅ harvested from penile skin, as a male-to-female gender reassignment surgery in transsexuals, in 1956. The skin graﬅ was ﬁxed to a mold, in line with the “McIndoe technique."
- "This technique is also a single stage procedure; its other advantage is that it uses hairless penile skin for the creation of a neovagina, with almost no visible scars to the donor area. In addition, the risk of postoperative complications is low, due to the fact that full-thickness skin graﬅs are less prone to contraction than split-thickness skin graﬅs. Still, intermittent dilatation is required in these patients as well... to prevent shrinking of the neovagina. In addition, they may develop the same postoperative complications as the patients with split-thickness neovaginas, such as condylomatosis, intraepithelial neoplasia in combination with HPV, carcinoma, poor erogenous sensation and absence of natural lubrication."
### Genital Skin Flaps
- "As stated previously, Gillies and Millard reported the use of penile skin ﬂap in the creation of a neovagina in male to female transsexuals in 1957. This procedure requires several sub-procedures to form the new vagina. Following the usual bilateral orchiectomy, the penis is dissected into its anatomical components, that is, the corpora cavernosa, the glans cap with the urethra and the neurovascular bundle, and the vascularized penile skin. Quite a few modiﬁcations of this technique have been described since, and it remains the gold standard in male to female sex reassignment surgery."
- "There are generally three groups of such modiﬁcations: (a) Use of inverted penile skin on an abdominal pedicle, as the sole graﬅ, in the form of an inside-out skin tube; (b) Splitting the pedicled penile skin ﬂap to create a rectangular ﬂap, which is then augmented by a rectangular scrotal skin ﬂap with a posterior pedicle to increase the size of the neovagina; (c) the pedicled penile skin ﬂap that can also be enlarged with a long vascularized urethral ﬂap, which is harvested and then embedded in the penile skin-tube ﬂap."
- "The advantages of the penile skin ﬂap technique in comparison to the skin graﬅs techniques include a decreased tendency to contract, sensation provided by the pedicle, absence of hair on the ﬂap and a far less common occurrence of neovaginal prolapse. The disadvantages include postoperative use of vaginal dilatators for at least 6 months aﬅer the surgery, according to instructions. Limited vaginal depth due to the limitation of penile skin length and mobilization of the pedicle results in wider anterior commissure that leaves clitoris more exposed and more sensitive and sometimes even painful during recovery. In cases where the penile skin length is insuﬃcient, the scrotal skin ﬂap can be used; however, unless this region is subjected to laser hair removal preoperatively, this will result in a partly hairy neovagina."
### Nongenital Skin Flaps
- "There were diﬀerent approaches from diﬀerent centers, such as Cairins and De Villiers, who used medial thigh ﬂap for neovaginal reconstruction in transsexual patients, and Huang who used inguinopudendal ﬂaps to create the neovagina."
- "Advantages of these techniques include the creation of a neovagina of an adequate depth, less risk of contraction and reduced period of postoperative dilatation compared to the nongenital skin graﬅ technique. Disadvantages include scarring of the donor area, technically very demanding procedures and bulkiness of the ﬂaps, with reduction of the neovaginal vault and no self-lubrication."
### Pedicled Intestinal Transplant Vaginoplasty
- "Ileum is frequently used by many surgeons, but its mucosa produces more abundant and less lubricating secretions then the sigmoid segment. Rectosigmoid vaginoplasty results in a well-proportioned, self-lubricating neovagina, which does not require postoperative dilatation for extended periods of time. Use of rectosigmoid colon as a pedicled ﬂap for the creation of a neovagina is eﬀective, being that a graﬅ of suﬃcient length may be obtained, with an excellent blood supply that could prevent complications such as shrinkage or narrowing. This segment is thick-walled, large in diameter and can tolerate trauma better than small bowel, bladder or skin graﬅs, and subsequently leads to a decreased risk of bleeding aﬅer sexual intercourse."
- "Postoperative management is simple and easy. The production of mucus can lead to excessive discharge, which decreases dramatically aﬅer 3–6 months, regardless of the sigmoid segment length. Filipas et al. recommended a daily vaginal cleansing regiment to evacuate the mucus, for a period of one month. The use of vaginal dilatators to maintain neovaginal patency is... well tolerated by the majority of patients."
- "Further disadvantages of intestinal vaginoplasty are the need for preoperative bowel preparation and additional abdominal surgery with intestinal anastomosis, which increases the risk of postoperative ileus. In addition, diversion colitis, as well as adenocarcinoma of neovagina, introital stenosis, mucocele and constipation have been reported, although with a low incidence."
- "Kim et al. recently concluded that rectosigmoid vaginoplasty is the best choice for male to female transsexuals who have previously undergone total penectomy and orchiectomy, or for those with previously failed skin vaginoplasty and for patients with Mayer-Rokitansky syndrome, as was also reported by Lima et al."
### Clitoro-Labioplasty
- "A section of penile skin base is used to form the labia minora, which are sutured to the de-epithelialized area of the neoclitoris; thus the neoclitoris is hooded with the labia minora. Excessive scrotal skin is removed and the remaining section used to form the labia majora... However, secondary corrections may be needed because of the changes in appearance, due to the healing process, usually one year post-operatively."
- "The ﬁrst report of the construction of a clitoris was published by Brown in 1976, using a reduced glans, attached to its dorsal penile neurovascular pedicle. The high percentage of clitoral necrosis reported by Brown himself provoked other authors to seek new or modiﬁed techniques in clitoroplasty."
- "Up to 1995, creation of the neoclitoris was not an important part of surgical standards in MTF sex reassignment surgery."
- "A very important surgical step is the creation of a well-vascularized neoclitoris during the primary vaginal reconstruction... Nowadays, the glans cap is divided into two parts, ventral and dorsal; the dorsal section of the glans is reduced by excising the central ventral tissue, leaving the sides of the glans intact. Lateral excisions on the glans are not recommended, to avoid injuring the neurovascular bundle, which enters the glans cap lateroventrally. However, the sides are de-epithelialized and sutured, to obtain a conical shape of the neoclitoris."
## Quality of Sexual Life
- "There are reports of sexual satisfaction aﬅer vaginoplasty in male to female patients, who were capable of achieving an orgasm in 70–80%. As concluded by Lief and Hubschman, a patient can be sexually satisﬁed following a SRS, despite inadequate sexual functioning. Our group also reported satisfactory results in 79% of male to female transgender patients following vaginoplasty involving penile skin combined with urethral ﬂap."
- "In their study, Weyers et al. reported that in average the transsexual women were very satisﬁed with their womanhood. **Sexual functioning and sexual satisfaction assessed by FSFI was diﬀerent in the study group according to the patient’s sexual orientation, and markedly lower in transwomen with homosexual preference.** As a generalized conclusion, authors stated that the modiﬁcation of the FSFI questionnaire for the transwomen should be created to fully understand the sexual function and diﬃculties in transsexual women."
## Conclusions
"Functional satisfaction in patients undergoing male to female sex reassignment surgery is greatly reliant on adequate depth of the neovagina as well as on the sensation of the neoclitoris needed to achieve an orgasm. Overall satisfaction of the patients is also related to aesthetic appearance of the neocreated vulva, visibility of scars and need for repeat surgeries."
## References
2 van Kesteren, Paul J., Louis J. Gooren, and Jos A. Megens. "An epidemiological and demographic study of transsexuals in the Netherlands." *Archives of Sexual Behavior* **25** (1996), 589-600: [external link to abstract](https://link.springer.com/article/10.1007/BF02437841)
3 Garrels, L., G. Kockott, N. Michael, W. Preuss, K. Renter, G. Schmidt, V. Sigusch, and K. Windgassen. "Sex ratio of transsexuals in Germany: the development over three decades." *Acta Psychiatrica Scandinavica* **102**, no. 6 (2001), 445-448: [external link](https://ai.eecs.umich.edu/people/conway/TS/Prevalence/Reports/REFs/garrels2000.pdf)
4 De Cuypere, Griet, M. Van Hemelrijck, A. Michel, B. Carael, Gunter Heylens, Robert Rubens, Piet Hoebeke, and Stan Monstrey. "Prevalence and demography of transsexualism in Belgium." *European Psychiatry* **22**, no. 3 (2007), 137-141: [external link](https://d1wqtxts1xzle7.cloudfront.net/67416006/DeCuypere2006-libre.pdf?1621861555=&response-content-disposition=inline%3B+filename%3DPrevalence_and_demography_of_transsexual.pdf&Expires=1778087946&Signature=CSxBe6bx7sClkXYgblQvAEA58XVjJ5vstK96dOwHt0renlyXSUqYt6mUAkU8y0C70X9IgKe~QxsbhnScyyh-TkfguzzVmlZzHHDp6gEv8NgpZQGr9hCBhMuUQgwjDLObjx1RuMcahFoy84avXslEhKb6GcbK5rRf-NPVoyNuy9v6Fkgj-az7maaVQl5Oa3O5fGkZJqqKjh3phUIUwWPIZ9VeEORLW9z3JW58sBHeGPOSsS7O7gJrdfQWo1WuyWvtO7ACPF~eBKJbXehQAUDx8buPmOYJ9qKGe8PGhauk4GA2XyJrdkEVnP4LSODI4ADuEReLQlNjsLKg-K6fHLLbgA__&Key-Pair-Id=APKAJLOHF5GGSLRBV4ZA)
5 Veale, Jaimie F. "Prevalence of transsexualism among New Zealand passport holders." *Australian & New Zealand Journal of Psychiatry* **42**, no. 10 (2008), 887: [external link to article draft](https://www.researchgate.net/profile/Jaimie-Veale/publication/23243121_Prevalence_of_Transsexualism_Among_New_Zealand_Passport_Holders/links/00b7d51a246208ad81000000/Prevalence-of-Transsexualism-Among-New-Zealand-Passport-Holders.pdf)
6 
7
8
11
12
13
14
16
20
24
25
26
27
28
31
32
33
35
39
40
45
46
47
50
51
52
53 Lief, H I and L Hubschman. "Orgasm in the postoperative transsexual." *Archives of Sexual Behavior* **22**, no. 2 (1993), 145-155: [external link to abstract](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/8476334/)
56 Weyers, Steven, MrSc Els Elaut, Petra De Sutter, Jan Gerris, Guy T'Sjoen, Gunter Heylens, Griet De Cuypere, and Hans Verstraelen. "Long-Term Assessment of the Physical, Mental, and Sexual Health Among Transsexual Women." *The Journal of Sexual Medicine* **6**, no. 3 (2009), 752-760: [external link]([https://academic.oup.com/jsm/article-abstract/6/3/752/6834498](https://d1wqtxts1xzle7.cloudfront.net/67416021/j.1743-6109.2008.01082.x20210524-7649-mj8me7-libre.pdf?1621861555=&response-content-disposition=inline%3B+filename%3DLong_term_Assessment_of_the_Physical_Men.pdf&Expires=1778086646&Signature=MT3P56gHbz-DXEFacUcv-apZekRjVsYsI760yIh5qUC3sROMuMazOz0GfgMBJyrJstEzLjnQp7H~niwQU2vXnqsxmQkUJFDQQCCGV7WIBmBOfGTNdljVaYh52HeMcmUhaNiPbEjDxdchRDm0HSP0oXgHkutkrl1wF6rAGE0AioBA8DHT10h6Bkao4LWUBTt91241SHOtIHNN32-JY5rD75NeCHgw79ACQkmTOFLeZ0apDsDzN1wpLdXTil7dOVBQI6X~pNQqv1c-hLmPqkdX5vfypJ~qJzxeiWlTujQ1C2z11h2h-lHkjEwsq5PHzI9IAJVHrGe-rckAYsi431mEfA__&Key-Pair-Id=APKAJLOHF5GGSLRBV4ZA))
# Tags
#/1931 #/1956 #/1957 #/2014 #AleksandarMilosevic #DavidRalphMillard #DraganDuisin #DusanStanojevic #FSFI #FelixAbraham #FemaleSexualFunctionIndex #GAS-complications-prolapse #GAS-complications-scarring #GAS-vaginoplasty #GAS-vaginoplasty-PI #GAS-vaginoplasty-depth #GAS-vaginoplasty-penileinversion #GAS-vaginoplasty-sensation #GAS-vaginoplasty-sigmoid #GradimirKorac #HaroldDelfGillies #MartaRBizic #MiroslavLDjordjevic #PFogh-Andersen #RalphMillard #surgicalcomplications #SvetlanaVujovic #theScientificWorldJournal #trans-sexuality #transgender-occurrencerate #transgender-sexualpleasure #transsexual #transsexual-sexuality #vaginoplasty #VladimirKojovic 

#unfinished-notes #unfinished-references