McKay, Matthew, Jeffrey C. Wood, and Jeffrey Brantley. *The Dialectical Behavior Therapy Skills Workbook.* New Harbinger Publications, Inc., 2007. 5th edition.
<h1><center><b> Chapter 1: Basic Distress Tolerance Skills</b> (p. 5-30)</h1></center>
## **Distress Tolerance Skills: What Are They?** (p. 5-9)
At some point in our lives, we all have to cope with distress and pain. Either it can be physical, like a bee sting or a broken arm, or it can be emotional, like sadness or anger. In both cases, the pain is often unavoidable and unpredictable. You can't always anticipate when the bee will sting you or when something will make you sad. Often, the best you can do is to use the coping skills that you have and hope that they work.

But for some people, emotional and physical pain feels more intense and occurs more frequently than it does for other people,. Their distress comes on more quickly and feels like an overwhelming tidal wave. Often, these situations feel like they'll never end, and the people experiencing them don't know how to cope with the severity of their pain. For the purposes of this book, we'll call this problem *overwhelming emotions*. (But remember, emotional and physical pain often occur together.)

People struggling with overwhelming emotions often deal with their pain in very unhealthy, very unsuccessful ways because they don't know what else to do. This is understandable. When a person is in emotional pain, it's hard to be rational and to think of a good solution. Nevertheless, many of the coping strategies used by people with overwhelming emotions only serve to make their problems worse.

Here's a list of some common coping strategies used by people dealing with this problem. Check the ones that you use to cope with your stressful situations.
- [ ] You spend a great deal of time thinking about past pains, mistakes, and problems.
- [ ] You get anxious worrying about possible future pains, mistakes, and problems.
- [ ] You isolate yourself from other people to avoid distressing situations.
- [ ] You isolate or make yourself feel numb with sleep.
- [ ] You make yourself feel numb with alcohol or drugs.
- [ ] You take your feelings out on other people by getting excessively angry at them or trying to control them.
- [ ] You engage in dangerous behaviors, such as cutting, hitting, picking at, or burning yourself or pulling out your own hair.
- [ ] You engage in unsafe sexual activities, such as having sex with strangers or having frequent unprotected sex.
- [ ] You avoid dealing with the causes of your problems, such as an abusive or dysfunctional relationship.
- [ ] You use food to punish or control yourself by eating too much, not eating at all, or by throwing up what you do eat.
- [ ] You attempt suicide or engage in high-risk activities, like reckless driving or taking dangerous amounts of alcohol and drugs.
- [ ] You avoid pleasant activities, such as social events and exercise,, maybe because you don't think that you deserve to feel better.
- [ ] You surrender to your pain and resign yourself to living a miserable and unfulfilling life.
All of these strategies are paths to even deeper emotional pain, because even the strategies that offer temporary relief will only cause you more suffering in the future. Use the Cost of Self-Destructive Coping Strategies worksheet to see how. Note the strategies that you use as well as their costs, and then include any additional costs that you can think of. At the end of the worksheet, feel free to add any of your own strategies that aren't included as well as their costs.
### The Cost of Self-Destructive Coping Strategies
| <center> **Self-Destructive Coping Strategy**</center>                                         | <center>**Possible Costs**</center>                                                                                                                                                                   |
| ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- | ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| 1. You spend a great deal of time thinking about past pain, mistakes, and problems.            | Miss good things that might be happening now and then regret missing those things, too; depression about the past; other:<br><br><br><br>                                                             |
| 2. You get anxious worrying about possible future pain, mistakes, and problems.                | Miss good things that might be happening now; anxiety about the future; other:<br><br><br><br>                                                                                                        |
| 3. You isolate yourself to avoid possible pain.                                                | Spend more time alone and, as a result, feel even more depressed; other:<br><br><br><br>                                                                                                              |
| 4. You use alcohol, drugs, and/or sleep to number yourself.                                    | Addiction; loss of money; work problems; legal problems; relationship problems; health consequences; other: <br><br><br><br>                                                                          |
| 5. You take your painful feelings out on others.                                               | Loss of friendships, romantic relationships, and family members; other people avoid you; loneliness; feel bad about hurting other people; legal consequences of your actions; other: <br><br><br><br> |
| 6. You engage in dangerous behaviors, like cutting, pulling out hair, and self-mutiliation.    | Possible death; infection; scarring; disfigurement; shame; physical pain; other: <br><br><br><br>                                                                                                     |
| 7. You engage in unsafe sexual activity, like un protected sex or frequent sex with strangers. | Sexually transmitted diseases, some life threatening; pregnancy; shame; embarrassment; other: <br><br><br><br>                                                                                        |
| 8. You avoid dealing with the causes of your problems.                                         | Put up with destructive relationships; get burned-out doing things for other people; don't get any of your own needs met; depression; other: <br><br><br><br>                                         |
| 9. You eat too much, restrict what you eat, or throw up what you eat.                          | Weight gain; anorexia; bulimia; health consequences; medical treatment; embarrassment; shame; depression                                                                                              |
| 10. You have attempted suicide or engaged in other nearly fatal activities.                    | Possible death; hospitalization; embarrassment; shame; depression; long-term medical complications; other: <br><br><br><br>                                                                           |
| 11. You avoid pleasant activities, like social events and exercise.                            | Lack of enjoyment; lack of exercise; depression; shame; isolation; other: <br><br><br><br>                                                                                                            |
| 12. You surrender to your pain and live an unfulfilling life.                                  | Lots of pain and stress; regrets about your life; depression; other: <br><br><br><br>                                                                                                                 |
| 13.                                                                                            | <br><br><br><br>                                                                                                                                                                                      |
| 14.                                                                                            | <br><br><br><br>                                                                                                                                                                                      |
The costs of these self-destructive coping strategies are clear. All of them lead to your pain being prolonged into long-term suffering. Remember, sometimes pain can't be avoided, but many times suffering can.

Take, for example, an argument between friends Maria and Sandra. For Maria, who doesn't have overwhelming emotions, the argument was initially painful. But after a few hours, she began to realize that she and Sandra were both to blame for the argument. So by the next day, Maria was no longer upset or made at Sandra. But for Sandra, who struggles with overwhelming emotions, the argument was replayed in her memory over and over again for three days. Each word and gesture was remembered as an insult from Maria. So the next time Sandra saw Maria, three days later, Sandra was still angry and she restarted the argument just where it had ended. Both women experienced the initial pain of the argument, but only Sandra was suffering. Clearly, Sandra carried her emotional pain of the argument, but only Sandra was suffering. Clearly, Sandra carrier her emotional pain with her for days, and it made her life more of a struggle. While we can't always control the pain in our lives, we can control the amount of suffering we have in response to that pain.

To avoid this type of long-term suffering, chapters 1 and 2 will teach you *distress tolerance skills*. These skills will help you endure and cope with your pain in a new, healthier way so that it doesn't lead to suffering. The new plan outlined in these two chapters will teach you to "distract, relax, and cope."
## **About This Chapter** (p. 9-10)
The first distress tolerance skills you'll learn in this chapter will help you distract yourself from the situations that are causing you emotional pain. Distraction skills are important because (1) they can temporarily stop you from thinking about your pain, and, as a result, (2) they give you time to find an appropriate coping response. Remember how Sandra carrier her pain with her for three days? She couldn't stop thinking about her argument with Maria. Distraction can help you let go of the pain by helping you think about something else. Distraction also buys you time so that your emotions can settle down before you take action to deal with a distressing situation.

However, do not confuse distraction with avoidance. When you avoid a distressing situation, you choose not to deal with it. But when you distract yourself from a distressing situation, you still intend to deal with it in the future, when your emotions have calmed down to a tolerable level.

The second group of distress tolerance skills you'll learn in this chapter are self-soothing skills (Johnson, 1985; Linehan, 1993b). It's often necessary to soothe yourself before you face the cause of your distress because your emotions might be too "hot." Many people with overwhelming emotions panic when faced with an argument, rejection, failure, or other painful events. Before you can address these problems with your new emotional regulation skills (chapters 6 and 7) or your new interpersonal effectiveness skills (chapters 8 and 9), it's often necessary to soothe yourself to regain your strength. In situations like these, distress tolerance skills are similar to refilling the gas in your car so that you can keep going. Self-soothing is meant to bring you some amount of peace and relief from your pain so that you can figure out what you're doing to do next.

**Self-soothing skills also serve another purpose. They'll help you learn to treat yourself compassionately.** Many people with overwhelming emotions have been abused or neglected as children. As a result, they were taught more about how to hurt than to help themselves. The second purpose of the self-soothing skills, therefore, is to teach you how to treat yourself kindly and lovingly.
## **How To Use This Chapter** (p. 10)
As you read the following groups of skills, mark the ones that are helpful to you.  This will make it easier to create a distraction plan for emergencies when you get to the end of this chapter. You'll also be shown how to create a list of relaxation skills to help soothe yourself, both at home and when you're away. Then, in the next chapter, you'll learn more advanced distress tolerance skills.
# Tags
#/2007 #CW-self-harm #CW-substanceabuse #CW-substancemisuse #CW-suicide #DBT #DBT-exercise #DBTgreenbook #DBTworkbook #distresstolerance #genre-self-help #isolation #JeffreyBrantley #JeffreyCWood #list #MatthewMcKay #mentalhealth #mentalhealth-self-talk #NewHarbingerPublications  #overhwelmingemotions #self-harm #self-regulation #self-soothing #substanceuse #substanceuse-alcohol #suicidality #tone-motivational #tone-self-help #worksheet 