# *Miss Major Speaks: Conversations with a Black Trans Revolutionary*
Meronek, Toshio Meronek and Miss Major. *Miss Major Speaks: Conversations with a Black Trans Revolutionary.* Verso Press, 2020. 4th edition.
# Introduction: TILIFI (p. 1-30)
- "For more than fifty years, Miss Major has played the crucial role of surrogate mother and grandmother to countless trans and queer people around the world." (1)
- "Major has surpassed the expectations of those she calls **'The Powers That Be'**: the corporate, government, and nonprofit actors who work to preserve the status quo, and the forces in the world who want us all to fit into our proper places in an established social hierarchy, from which they can look down on us and make sure we don't fuck with the money and privilege they hoard." (1)
- "Major's driver's license lists her date of birth as October 25, 1946. Her parents raised her and her two siblings, Cookie and Sargeant, off the salaries of a United States Postal Service administrator and a beauty shop manager during the few years when a Black middle class began to grow in cities like Chicago. There, she graduated high school at sixteen, and her family paid to send her to college in Minnesota... In the dorms she was placed with a roommate who couldn't keep a secret, and after he discovered her suitcase of femme clothing, she left school before the first term was over." (2)
- "Once a month, she trekked three hours up to Riverview, an amusement park on the North Side where she bought hormones from a dealer who held office hours under a rickety wooden roller coaster." (2)
- "Major hadn't even turned twenty when her mother declared that Chicago wasn't big enough for the two of them, so she and a friend stole a car and took off in the direction of New York City. They were so eager to leave that a cop pulled them over for speeding before they had made it past the city limits; Major wound up in jail for six months..." (2)
- "...But she'd come to New York to perform, not to paint.
  
  The Apollo Theater had an established drag show called the Jewel Box Revue, which Major had first seen in Chicago during one of the group's cross-country tours. Its posters promised the 'Most Exciting Deception in the World,' starring 'twenty-five men and one girl.' During the weeklong run, Major had dressed 'in her stuff' and spent nights at the stage door until she met the stage manager and charmed her way onto the cast, taking on a backup role when one of the regular cast members fell ill. She rejoined the cast in New York." (3)
- "Trans women, especially Black trans women, still have few job options that offer a living wage. The stage shows at the Apollo didn't pay enough to survive, but sex work did, as Major learned from other performers. One night working the Avenues in Lower Manhattan paid the bills faster than the drag shows and the morgue combined. Major learned how to clock undercover cops and further refined her ability to sweat charm, gliding between the social groups that claimed territory on the Avenue and clients of all sorts." (3-4)
- "The worst johns were the police officers, who paid not in cash but in fewer arrests. The energy it took to get a cop off was usually preferable to the alternative: time inside some kind of cage. After an arrest, Major would emerge from a patrol car with wrists bruised from the handcuffs, her forehead puffy from impact with the car door when the officer had pushed her inside. Usually the destination was the closest precinct jail for one night or five, as when Major was knocked out and tossed into a paddy wagon during the 199 riots against a police raid at the Stonewall Inn." (4)
- "Even at a time when the West Village was ruled by queens, the Stonewall was one of the few gay bars in the neighborhood where trans people weren't immediately turned away at the door by gays and lesbians, who were often as vicious as anyone toward the gurls. At the time, most of New York's gay bars were owned by mafiosos who kept them open by paying off the NYPD and its vice squads." (4)
- "At other time the patrol car would stop at Bellevue Hospital, a psychiatric asylum that was a dumping ground for gurls during Major's twenties, in the 1960s. The hospital's "pavilion for the insane" was a predecessor to maximum-security civil commitment "hospitals," where most "patients" are held indefinitely under threat of force by corrections officers, barbed-wire-topped walls, and the newest surveillance technology. Just as Major and the gurls cop-watched for each other while on the streets, they taught each other the particular words and facial expressions that could win the sympathy of the psych doctors and nurses at Bellevue." (5)
- "When sex work and lip-synchicng at the Jewel Boz and elsewhere didn't translate into a living, Major fell into side hustles... An attempted ninety-miles-per-hour escape from the New York State Police ended in a crash with an oil truck and five years locked up in a town on the edge of the Canadian border." (5-6)
- "Prisons depend on the bodies of marginalized people to justify their existence and their expansion, so in the 1990s, they poured money into finding words that would make them sound less toxic. Observing that the public responded positively to words like "rehabilitation" and "treatment", prisons hired architects and designers to draw the blueprints for "kinder, gentler" prison environments, with special wings for trans people. They developed "mental health jails" and "behavioral health justice centers" where police could store homeless people, disabled people, and people with drug addictions without telling them when their imprisonment might end. But prison, especially the insanity-inducing, soul-numbing atomization of solitary confinement cells, which is where trans gurls are often held, is not a place for rehabilitation." (6)
- "These prison makeovers more often only increased their brutality; for example, after the 1971 rebellion at Attica Correctional Facility in New York, for example, the dining hall was outfitted with a system of pipes that could release tear gas in case of future uprisings. GED programs have been shut down while the lists of censored books and magazines grow in an attempt to keep people from organizing." (6-7)
- "Prison cells are disproportionately stacked with poor, disabled, Black, and Brown people; Black trans women, who are often at the intersection of all of these identities, are the most overrepresented group inside prison walls. A study by the National Center for Transgender Rights and the National LGBTQ Task Force found that almost half of Black trans women in the United States have been incarcerated. Once inside, their abuse rates are extreme. The abolitionist group Black & Pink surveyed 1,100 queer and trans people in lockup, and one out of three described being assaulted by prison staff. Groups like Black & Pink and the Transgender, Gender Variant, and Intersex Justice Project (TGIJP) have made themselves known to the system must employ ever more devious ways to cloak the abuses." (7)
- "But her stint in New York *was* a time of politicization. "I never considered myself a political person," she says, until she met Frank "Big Black" Smith, one of the leaders of the Attica Rebellion. Locked up in the solitary wing of the Clinton Correctional Facility in Dannemora, New York, Black and Major managed to form a friendship through the cell walls; with Black's mentorship, Major began to formalize her thoughts around power and oppression, including her understanding of prisons as a twisted extension of slavery. Black introduced her to new awareness of overarching systems, explaining how prison towns like Dannemora functioned like company towns... prison towns became sustained by a core industry that drew residents who needed work, their paychecks signed by the industry of incarceration." (7-8)
- "Black and Major talked about the leadership role she could fill for her gurls -- how she could encourage them to learn about their oppression and fight it. He helped her understand the importance of role models and comrades to encourage you to "change the status quo and make life really fucking annoying for the Powers That Be." When she was released from prison, Major brought their conversations to her gurls back in New York City, and later to San Diego, the Bay Area, and Little Rock." (8)
- "It took a couple of years for her to get herself together, but she put the political awakening she'd had in prison into practice when the late seventies viciously quieted the gay metropoles. The HIV/AIDS crisis was beginning, silencing the bathhouses, bars, and sexual liberation movements that were already under siege by the government. The FBI, the CIA, and police departments infiltrated and destabilized groups that were anti-war, or pro-worker, or anti-racist, or pro-housing for all. Leaders like Big Black were surveilled and imprisoned, and in some cases assassinated." (9)
- "People who contracted HIV were neglected or treated like the devil's spawn, so Major collectivized some of the gurls as the "Angels of Care," enlisting them into service as nurses, just without a formal degree. Gurls who hooked for a living not only faced a high risk of getting the virus on the job, but they were also losing clients to the disease and the fear of it. The "legitimate" work of caretaking was a way to fill the holes in their purses, and a relief to the gay men with HIV they cared for. These men's family members were often too afraid to do more than wave from the apartment door, but could afford to pay the gurls to give fastidious sponge baths, act as therapists to offset the depression that permeated the entire community, and, occasionally, offer distraction from the drea in the form of a quality handjob." (9-10)
- "In the late 1970s, Major met a woman named Debbie and had a biological kid with her named Christopher, who still calls Major "Daddy."" (10)
- "... the combined and overlapping forces of local politicians, law enforcement officers, real estate moguls, and Wall Street bankers bled New York of queer landmarks and patched over them with condos and office space. "Urban renewal", as the gentrifying class called it, claimed notorious cruising spots like the porn theaters of Times Square and Chelsea Piers, where activist Sylvia Rivera lived out her final years homeless." (10-11)
- "Major spent her next quarter-century in California, moving between San Diego and the Bay Area. HIV/AIDS care was one of the few above-ground jobs where out trans people had a chance at a second interview. In San Diego she formed another Angels of Care collective, and in San Francisco she drove the city's most controversial van: its first mobile needle exchange. Needle exchanges save low-income people from dying, so naturally they were resented by local neighborhood associations that represented landlords, as well as the bleach company Clorox, whose executives were pissed that their flagship cleaning product might be associated with HIV-prevention programs. Major worked mostly where the gurls were: in the central Tenderloin district that was a (relatively) safe haven for trans women and nonbinary people. Enough queens and queers lived here to support more than three dozen community meeting places, including hustler bars, leather clubs, and activist printshops pumping out newsletters and wheat-paste-ready posters." (11-12)
- "The Powers That Be had long attacked the Tenderloin through an assortment of strategies, with constant attempts by the real estate industry, city hall, and the neighborhood associations it supported to gentrify the neighborhood as well as the adjacent Polk Gulch and South of Market district."
- "It was thirty years after Stonewall, but gurls were still being hospitalized by beatings and disappeared by police into one of San Francisco County's seven operating jails or highly securitized "transitional housing." In the Tenderloin, the transitional housing was run by the private prison conglomerate Geo Group and operated out of the site of the Compton's Cafeteria riot, a trans-led anti-police rebellion that preceded Stonewall by three years." (12)
- "Major started working for the nonprofit Tenderloin AIDS Resource Center (TARC), located on the first story of a brick building in the thick of the Tenderloin. She turned a vacant apartment next door to the office into a sometimes twenty-four-hour drop-in center called GiGi's Place, then took the first swings of a sledgehammer to the wall separating them. Technically GiGi's Place was part of the clinic, but the setting was anything but clinical. Major brought over a couple of sofas from the house in East Bay where she lived with Christopher and her dad... The sofas were intended to make GiGi's Place as homey as a living room for the gurls, most of whom had been cast out of the houses where they'd grown up for being trans. After sofas came mirrors that the gurls who worked nights out on the streets of the Tenderloin could use to dress up, paint themselves, and help other gurls do the same, as Major had done with her gurls in New York City." (13)
- "TARC's white gay executive director felt that Major's vision was too radical -- "even if radical action was necessary to slow the infections and deaths of so many queer and trans people -- and pushed back against Major's efforts with GiGi's Place. Major started working on an exit plan for him, with help from her co-worker and comrade Smitty, who worked the front desk at TARC. Smitty started working at TARC after being fired from the city's most well-funded HIV nonprofit, the San Francisco AIDS Foundation, for attempting to unionize. By the mid-1990s, the foundation was being run by white gay guys with money who held galas honoring pharmaceutical companies like Gilead Sciences that were in the HIV maintenance business; many of the city's politicians were happy to show up at these events to mine the community for liberal credibility. At TARC, Smitty helped Major organize staff members who were willing to lose their jobs to keep the clinic from following the inaccessible, corporate model of the SF AIDS Foundation. In a staff meeting, Major stood up and told the executive director that TARC was forgetting its mission to help the residents of the Tenderloin. "The natives are getting restless," she said. Smitty and Major's efforts were successful; by the time GiGi's Place was celebrating its one-month anniversary, TARC's executive director had submitted his resignation to the board." (13-14)
- "When I became a speck of space dust in the galaxy of Major, she was already an icon in the coastal queer capitals of New York City and the Bay Area. It was 2010, and I was in San Francisco, where I subsidized my writing by walking the dogs of ghats who worked in the tech industry and selling fake designed handbags on eBay." (14)
- "Interns at the queer therapy collective in the Castro flexed their active-listening skills while I spent my allotted fifty minutes per week trying to convince them that everyone should be way more worried than they seemed to be. I had so much evidence: the wildfires, the pandemics; the drones that were designed a few miles south in Silicon Valley; the enslaved laborers in the Congo who mined the raw metals that went into those drones; the sweatshop workers in Shenzhen who manufactured them; and all the people being terrorized or mourned after the United States shipped the drones to Syria and Yemen. Those fucking robots, I warned, they would come for the Bay soon." (15)
- "San Francisco is the city with more billionaires per capita than anywhere else in the world, and even more aspiring billionaires, who convince the city to spend several billion dollars every year terrorizing anyone who can't afford to live in the more than 40,000 homes owned by corporate landlords: using fire hoses to clear people from the sidewalks, locking them up for sitting there in the first place, and confiscating and selling or throwing tents into a dumpster..." (15-16)
# Tags
#/1946 #/1971 #/2010 #/2020 #AngelsofCare #ApolloTheater #AtticaCorrectionalFacility #AtticaRebellion #BellevueHospital #Chicago #ClintonCorrectionalFacility #communitycare #GeoGroup #GiGisPlace #HIV-AIDS #HIV-AIDS-epidemic #HIV-AIDS-prevention #HIV-AIDS-respitecare #harmreduction-needleexchange #homelessness #JewelBoxRevue #MissMajor #MissMajorGriffin-Gracy #NewYorkCity #prison #prison-industrialcomplex #SFAF #SFAIDSFoundation #SanFrancisco #SanFranciscoAIDSFoundation #sexwork #TARC #Tenderloin #TenderloinAIDSResourceCenter #theme-community #ToshioMeronek #transgender #transgender-UnitedStates #transitionalhousing #UnitedStates-transgender #WestVillage

#unfinished-notes #unfinished-tags