Francis, Courtney, Ethan Grober, Emery Potter, Nolan Blodgett and Yonah Krakowsky. "A Simple Guide for Simple Orchiectomy in Transition-Related Surgeries". *Sexual Medicine Reviews* **8**, no. 3 (2020), 492-496: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/abs/pii/S2050052119301209
## Abstract
### Background
"To date, there is no literature on orchiectomy as a stand-alone procedure in the transgender surgical context."
### Aim
"To propose a simple guide to aid health-care professionals caring for transgender and gender nonconforming individuals seeking bilateral simple orchiectomy."
### Methods
"We use expert opinion to provide a novel guide for simple orchiectomy in the transition-related context for health-care professionals caring for transgender and gender nonconforming individuals. A review of relevant literature was also performed focusing on simple orchiectomy and vaginoplasty surgeries for transgender and gender nonconforming individuals."
### Main Outcome Measures
"We describe the indications, surgical approach, preoperative and postoperative assessment, and the risks and benefits of bilateral simple orchiectomy in the context of gender surgery."
### Results
### Clinical Implications
### Strengths and Limitations
### Conclusion
## Introduction
- "Transgender women and transfeminine individuals may pursue a wide variety of lower (genital) surgical options, including orchiectomy (removal of testicular tissue), scrotectomy (removal of scrotal tissue), and vaginoplasty (creation of a neovagina and removal of the penile and testicular tissues). These surgical options help alleviate gender dysphoria, and most individuals report improved quality of life and mood after gender-confirmation surgery."
- "Orchiectomy may occur at the time of vaginoplasty, as an isolated procedure before vaginoplasty or in individuals desiring orchiectomy alone."
- "Importantly, **for the patient to be able to provide informed consent**, a presurgical planning visit should be undertaken with the qualified professional to discuss the risks, benefits, objectives, and surgical options. It is encouraged that the health professional is not simply performing an assessment to see if the patient meets criteria for surgery but that they are having an informed and robust conversation involving a description of the surgery, intended results, different techniques and options, and a brief review of possible risks and side effects."
- "In addition, some individuals will seek orchiectomy to aid with **“tucking,” a technique in which the penis and testes are secured between the buttocks or the testes are placed into the inguinal canals.** This allows for the appearance of a smooth crotch contour so that the penis and testicles are not visible through clothing, undergarments, or swimwear."
- "Many patients desire orchiectomy **to discontinue testosterone blockers**, such as spironolactone and cyproterone acetate... \[which] simplifies the hormonal treatment regime and **reduces unwanted side effects** (Table 2). Orchiectomy may also decrease the dosage of estrogen therapy required to achieve the desired effects which can also reduce the potential adverse effects of this therapy."
- "**Risk factors for testicular abnormalities** should be discussed, such as cryptorchidism, personal history of testicular cancer, and ethnicity (Table 3)."
- "When moving on to the physical examination portion of the clinical encounter, it is important to prioritize patient privacy and comfort..."
- "Physical examination should include a thorough inspection of the scrotal skin, contours, and inguinal areas for any lesions, masses, lymphadenopathy, or other abnormalities. Palpation of each testis, epididymis, and spermatic cord should be performed to assess the size, shape, and consistency of the scrotal contents. It is also critical to assess for testicular masses and tenderness... The patient should be informed about the findings and provided with a general impression after the physical examination."
- "Identification of testicular masses on examination should warrant a scrotal ultrasound and assessment of testicular cancer tumor markers... masses confirmed by ultrasound should be assessed urgently by a urologist, before proceeding with surgery, as the surgical approach with a possible testicular malignancy differs from that of the transition-related orchiectomy."
- "Orchiectomy is almost always performed in the outpatient surgical setting... The various options for anesthesia should be discussed before surgery, including general anesthesia, spinal anesthesia, or local anesthesia."
- "Before surgery, informed consent should be obtained and a conversation regarding the risks of surgery, including pain, hematoma, swelling, skin infection, and possible reduction in erectile function. In addition, it is critical to review alternative treatment options, including the continuation of antiandrogen therapy and/or orchiectomy at the time of vaginoplasty."
- "Although most patients have already had a discussion regarding fertility preservation before initiating hormones, this should also be addressed before surgery."
- "...it is critical for clinicians to inform all patients of fertility preservation options, such as cryopreservation and sperm banking, before the initiation of hormonal therapy. If patients want to proceed with fertility preservation before surgery, there is typically a 3-month hormone-free period required before banking sperm."
- "Our surgical approach for simple orchiectomy involves the creation of a single incision to remove both testicle and maximal length of the spermatic cord bilaterally, while preserving scrotal fat and fascia for potential use in future surgeries. However, a subinguinal approach, similar to that in radical orchiectomy, may also be used."
- "Orchiectomy is performed with the patient lying supine. We typically give a single dose of intravenous first generation cephalosporins at the time of the skin incision. Patients allergic to penicillin may receive clindamycin, although cross reactivity is rare. The scrotal skin is then shaved and prepped with antiseptic solution.
  
  The procedure begins with a 2–4 cm midline vertical incision over the median raphe of the scrotum. Next, the dartos muscle is dissected, and the tunica vaginalis is identified and then entered. The cremasteric fibers are dissected to gain optimal length of the spermatic cord. The testicle and spermatic cord should be removed with as much cord length as possible, as residual cord tissue can be palpable and bothersome postoperatively. Kelly Hemostatic clamps can be placed at the proximal cord, as close to the external ring as possible. The cord can be then be tied with a heavy silk tie and/or suture ligated to ensure adequate control of the testicular and cremasteric arteries. The Kelly Hemostatic clamps can be removed as the cord is transected with cautery distal to the sutures. This procedure is preformed bilaterally.
  
  Hemostasis of the scrotal tissue can be achieved with cautery. The dartos muscle, followed by the skin, is then closed with a fine absorbable suture, using a simple continuous running suture technique. Care is taken not to remove any scrotal skin or dartos tissue, which may be used for vaginoplasty in the future. Testicular specimens should be sent, identified separately, to the pathology department to assess for possible malignancy."
- Aftercare: "Patients may be discharged home after successful emergence from anesthesia. Surgical dressings can be removed on postoperative day 2. At that stage, patients may shower, but we recommend waiting 1 month before taking baths or swimming. Heavy lifting should also be avoided for 1 month. Postoperative pain is normal after orchiectomy. Therefore, patients should be instructed to apply ice as much as possible and wear tight, supportive underwear. In our experience, most patients had adequate pain control with ice, supportive underwear, and acetaminophen or ibuprofen. For some patients, a few days of narcotic analgesia is required. Patients should return for follow-up 4 weeks postoperatively to assess recovery and healing of the surgical site, as well as to review the pathology report from the testicular specimens."
## Discussion (Snippet)
## Conclusion (Snippet)
- "Although orchiectomy may occur before or at the time of vaginoplasty, we have experienced an increased desire for stand-alone orchiectomy in our transfeminine population."
## ... (to be continued)
# Tags
#/2020 #CourtneyFrancis #electrocautery #EmeryPotter #EthanGrober #fertilitypreservation #GAC #GAS #GAS-orchiectomy #gender-affirmingcare #gender-affirmingsurgery #informedconsent #NolanBlodgett #SexualMedicineReviews #surgicalrecovery #surgicaltechnique #testicularabnormalities #tone-instructional #tone-technical #transgender #transsexuality #tucking #WPATH #WorldProfessionalAssociationforTransgenderHealth #YonahKrakowsky

#unfinished-missingoriginal #unfinished-partialoriginal #unfinished-references