Zoltin, Kitan, Briar Shannon, Ryan Timar, Gaines Blasdel, and Nabeel Shakir. "Orchiectomy and scrotectomy as genital gender-affirming surgery: novel surgical technique and patient-reported outcomes". *BMC Urology* **25** (2025): https://link.springer.com/article/10.1186/s12894-025-01867-8
## Abstract
### Background
"Gender-affirming orchiectomy is well described; however, a subset of patients may also seek scrotectomy to alleviate dysphoria related to the scrotum. Techniques and outcomes of gender-affirming orchiectomy and scrotectomy (GAOS) have not been described to date."
### Methods
"We retrospectively reviewed all patients who had undergone GAOS from 2021 to 2024 at our institution. The World Professional Association for Transgender Health criteria for surgical treatment were met preoperatively, and patients understood vaginoplasty was not recommended post-scrotectomy. Two approaches were offered: excision of a majority of scrotal tissue and primary closure of the perineal wound, or excision of all rugated skin with mons and groin (Y-flap) advancement. Patient-reported outcomes questionnaires from the PROMIS® Sexual Function and Satisfaction Measures, version 2.0, along with questions specific to post-scrotectomy anatomy, were sent postoperatively."
### Results
"Eight patients, median age 31 years, underwent GAOS with a preoperative hormone duration of 26.5 months. All patients reported dysphoria related to the scrotum and testes, and wished to preserve the phallus. Five elected for primary closure, three for Y-flap perineoplasty. At median 97-day follow-up, all reported satisfaction and dysphoria relief. One patient with Y-flap experienced wound dehiscence requiring operative revision. Four reported sexual activity with the ability to achieve erection and orgasm."
### Conclusions
## Background
- \[There has been] "substantial growth in the frequency of GAS procedures, with research revealing an almost threefold increase in the total number of surgeries performed between 2016 and 2020. "
- "While orchiectomy is well-described, techniques and outcomes for gender-affirming orchiectomy and scrotectomy (GAOS) have to date not been discussed in the literature. Here, we present our initial experience with GAOS, as a viable option for AMAB patients who experience dysphoria related to the scrotum and testes, but do not desire a vaginoplasty and/or who wish to retain the phallus."
## Methods
### Indications for procedure
- "In addition, patients seeking GAOS specifically may also describe dysphoria owing to the presence of the scrotum itself, rugated skin, or midline raphe. While phenotypic sex presents on a spectrum determined by genetic and hormonal, the rugation of scrotal skin is a direct result of testosterone exposure in utero and thus is a primary sex characteristic."
- "Patients are counseled on the permanency of GAOS, and that vulvar or vaginal construction following this would be significantly more challenging owing to limited availability of tissue."
### Preoperative preparation
- "Options for fertility preservation, or performing orchiectomy alone, were discussed. All patients selected for GAOS expressed no desire for other gender-affirming genital surgeries, and further expressed written understanding that vaginoplasty would not be recommended following scrotectomy."
- "Patients taking antiandrogens ceased taking these medications on postoperative day 1."
### Intraoperative considerations
- "After induction of general anesthesia, patients are positioned in dorsal lithotomy and receive a single dose of preoperative intravenous prophylactic antibiotic coverage with cefazolin and gentamicin. A dorsal phallic and bilateral pudendal block is performed with 0.25% bupivacaine. A holding suture is placed in the glans for retraction. A Foley catheter is placed for urethral identification and removed at the end of the operation.
  
  With the phallus on stretch, the scrotal dimensions are measured, the borders of the rugated skin are marked, and the elasticity of the surrounding mons and groin tissue is noted (Fig. 1). If a phallic-scrotal web is present, it is marked separately from the remainder of the scrotum. A full thickness excision of the rugated scrotal skin is then performed. Bilateral orchiectomy proceeds by skeletonizing each spermatic cord to the level of the external inguinal ring, excising it after clamping doubly, and suture and free-ligating the stump to achieve hemostasis with 0 Vicryl. Care is taken to ensure that the spermatic cord stump retracts fully into the external inguinal ring to prevent a postoperative inguinal bulge.
  ...
  For either technique, no drain is placed. The phallic shaft is wrapped with gauze and the perineum is dressed with a compressive bandage."
### Linear perineorrhaphy
"The scrotal web is preserved in order to maintain ventral coverage of the phallus. Multilayered closure of the perineum with running 2-0 Vicryl suture is accomplished based on the mobility of the surrounding medial groin skin and subcutaneous tissue to recreate the midline raphe (Fig. [2](https://link.springer.com/article/10.1186/s12894-025-01867-8#Fig2))."
### Y-flap reconstruction
"The scrotal web is excised, resulting in a ventral phallic skin deficiency. Corresponding to the dimensions of this defect, adipocutaneous advancement flaps from the mons and bilateral groin are raised to cover the ventral phallus and superior aspect of the perineal defect (Fig. [3](https://link.springer.com/article/10.1186/s12894-025-01867-8#Fig3)). Multilayered closure of the remaining perineal defect via closure of the bilateral medial groin tissue is performed as above."
### Postoperative management and follow-up
"Patients are discharged on the day of the procedure once they have passed a trial of void. The dressings are removed after 24 h and patients are counseled to wrap the phallus daily to reduce postoperative edema. Restrictions in terms of strenuous exercise or sexual activity were advised for 4 weeks postoperatively. Follow up was performed at intervals of 1 week, 2 weeks, 6 weeks, 3 months postoperatively and thereafter as clinically indicated."
### Study measures and analysis
"We developed a questionnaire tailored to the anatomy following GAOS, including from the **PROMIS® Sexual Function and Satisfaction Measures, version 2.0**, as well as novel items which we formulated to reflect the postulated post-GAOS anatomy and function, which were sent to all patients postoperatively (Additional file 1). The additional questions in the survey had potential responses on a five-point Likert scale."
## Results
### Preoperative
"From 2021-2024, 124 patients underwent gender-affirming orchiectomy at our institution, of whom 8 patients elected for GAOS specifically. The median age at the time of surgery was 31 years (range 24–47 years). The median BMI was 27.0 (range 22.7–37.1). The median duration of hormone use was 26.5 months (range 0–110 months). Preoperatively, all patients reported no difficulty maintaining erections and no difficulty achieving orgasm."
### Intraoperative
"All patients were identified as having a scrotal web. Five patients elected for linear perineorrhaphy while three patients elected for Y-flap reconstruction. Overall median operative time was 143.5 min (range 118–196 min) and median blood loss was 25 ml (range 10-50 ml). The median area of tissue excision was 120 cm2 (range 40–480 cm2). There were no intraoperative complications."
### Postoperative
"Patients were followed with in-person appointments to a median of 97 days post-surgery (range 48–605 days). All patients reported preserved erections postoperatively, reduction of dysphoria, sexual activity, improvement in quality of life, and satisfaction with the surgery (Additional file 2). No patients reported pain or discomfort related to tension at the scar site, nor did any experience prolonged activity restrictions beyond the standard four-week recovery period."
## Discussion
- "We present a novel description of genital gender affirming surgery that addresses dysphoria related to excess scrotal tissue and rugated skin for well-informed patients not interested in future gender-affirming vaginoplasty. In our practice, the annual prevalence of the request for scrotectomy is about 10%. Whether this reflects broader trends in other practices or regions is difficult to assess, chiefly because the literature to date, including reviews of claims databases, has described orchiectomy alone or as a bridge to vulvoplasty or vaginoplasty."
- "In our series, patients described difficulty with finding a provider willing to discuss GAOS, with one patient reporting 200 such attempts (Additional file 2). Notably, all patients in our series specifically requested GAOS prior to consultation, highlighting a gap in available options that align with the surgical goals of this population. Our experience demonstrates that patients do in fact benefit from GAOS, which can address preoperative concerns successfully."
- "A further barrier to care may be the idea that the ultimate goal of genital gender-affirming surgery for AMAB patients is either vulvoplasty or vaginoplasty. In our practice, we counsel patients extensively, and obtain preoperative written attestation of their understanding that vaginal construction following GAOS is not recommended."
- "Nevertheless, vaginal construction would not necessarily be absolutely contraindicated, as techniques to mitigate limited external genital tissue have been described. Care should be taken in cases of expressed interest in future vaginoplasty or vulvoplasty, and counseling should emphasize the potential technical limitations imposed by prior scrotectomy."
### Limitations
- "We encountered challenges in our study design, as no instruments specific to patient goals and postoperative anatomy relevant to GAOS existed. To this end, we incorporated questions that are specific to presumed anatomy and function following GAOS into the PROMIS® Sexual Function and Satisfaction Measures, version 2.0, for example postoperative item #4 regarding tucking (Additional file 1). While the preexisting instrument has demonstrated validity in diverse populations, our modifications to it require validation and review externally."
- "Further limitations of our study include its retrospective nature and being derived from a single institution’s data, which limits generalizability."
## Conclusion
## Abbreviations
***GAOS***: Gender-affirming orchiectomy and scrotectomy
***PROMIS:*** Patient- Reported Outcomes Measurement Information system
## References
2 van der Sluis, Wouter B., Tim Schäfer, Tim H.J. Nijhuis, and Mark-Bram Bouman. "Genital gender-affirming surgery for transgender women." *Best Practice & Research Clinical Obstetrics & Gynecology* **86** (2023): https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S152169342200178X?via%3Dihub
3 Elyaguov, Jason, Jessica N. Schardein, Joshua Sterling, and Dmitriy Nikolavsky. "Gender Affirmation Surgery, Transfeminine." *Urology Clinics of North America* **49**, no. 3 (2022).
4 Blasdel, Gaines, Augustus C. Parker, Ara Salibian, Isabel Robinson, Lee C. Zhao, and Rachel Bluebond-Langner. "Recommendations for Communication in Gender-Affirming Surgical Care." *Plastic and Reconstructive Surgery* **150**, no. 2 (2022): https://journals.lww.com/plasreconsurg/fulltext/2022/08000/recommendations_for_communication_in.42.aspx
6 van der Sluis, Wouter B., Thomas D. Steensma, and Mark-Bram Bouman. "Orchiectomy in transgender individuals: A motivation analysis and report of surgical outcomes." *International Journal of Transgender Health* **21**, no. 2 (2020): https://www.tandfonline.com/doi/full/10.1080/26895269.2020.1749921
7 Hana, Tommy, Lucshman Raveendran, Ethan Grober, Emery Potter, Nolan Blodgett, and Yonah Krakowsky. "Initial clinical experience with simple orchiectomy procedures in the context of transition-related surgeries." *International Journal of Transgender Health* **21**, no. 4 (2020): https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC8726671/
8 Poteat, Tonia, Mannat Malik, and Erin Cooney. "Understanding the health effects of binding and tucking for gender affirmation." Cambridge University Press (online), 2018: https://www.cambridge.org/core/journals/journal-of-clinical-and-translational-science/article/2148-understanding-the-health-effects-of-binding-and-tucking-for-gender-affirmation/4063741C516A658B4140791588C6327D
10 Kozato, Aki, G W Conner Fox, Patrick C Yong, Sangyoon J Shin, Bella K Avanessian, Jess Ting, Yiwei Ling, Subha Karim, Joshua D Safer, and Johny Henry Pang. "No Venous Thromboembolism Increase among Transgender Female Patients Remaining on Estrogen for Gender-Affirming Surgery." *The Journal of Clinical Endocrinology & Metabolism* **106**, no. 4 (2021).
12 Saltman, Anna J., Miguel I. Dorante, Michael M. Jonczyk, Michelle Chiu, Nicholas C. Bene, Khushabu Kasabwala, and Brian B. Freniere. "Outcomes of Orchiectomy for Gender-affirming Surgery: A National Surgical Quality Improvement Program Study." *Urology* **180** (2023).
13 Hehemann, Marah C. and Thomas J. Walsh. "[[2019-OrchiAsBridge|Orchiectomy as Bridge or Alternative to Vaginoplasty]]." *Urology Clinics of North America* **46** (2019), 505-510: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/abs/pii/S0094014319300527?via%3Dihub
14 Almazan, Anthony N. and Alex S. Keuroghlian. "Association Between Gender-Affirming Surgeries and Mental Health Outcomes." *JAMA Surgery* **156**, no. 7 (2021): https://jamanetwork.com/journals/jamasurgery/fullarticle/2779429
15 van der Sluis, Wouter B., Thomas D. Steensma, Floyd W. Timmermans, Jan Maerten Smit, Kristin de Haseth, Müjde Özer, and Mark-Bram Bouman. "Gender-Confirming Vulvoplasty in Transgender Women in the Netherlands: Incidence, Motivation Analysis, and Surgical Outcomes." *The Journal of Sexual Medicine* **17**, no. 8 (2020).
16 Blickensderfer, Kayla, Benjamin McCormick, Jeremy Myers, Isak Goodwin, Cori Agarwal, Joshua Horns, and James Hotaling. "Gender-affirming Vaginoplasty and Vulvoplasty: An Initial Experience." *Urology* **176**, (2023): 
17 Blasdel, Gaines, Carmen Kloer, August Parker, Nabeel Shakir, Lee C. Zhao, and Rachel Bluebond-Langner. "Genital Hypoplasia before Gender-Affirming Vaginoplasty: Does the Robotic Peritoneal Flap Method Create Equivalent Vaginal Canal Outcomes?" *Plastic and Reconstructive Surgery* **151**, no. 4 (2023): https://journals.lww.com/plasreconsurg/fulltext/2023/04000/genital_hypoplasia_before_gender_affirming.34.aspx
# Tags
#/2025 #BriarShannon #complicationrates #dysphoria #GAS #GAS-complications #GAS-GAOS  #GAS-GAOS-linearperineorrhaphy #GAS-GAOS-Y-flapreconstruction #GAS-orchiectomy #GAS-scrotectomy  #GAS-vaginoplasty #GAS-vulvoplasty  #GainesBlasdel #KitanZoltin #linearperineorrhaphy #NabeelShakir #PROMIS #rugation #RyanTimar #self-reported-treatmentefficacy #surgicalcomplications #surgicaltechnique #suturing #transgender #transgender-dysphoria #transsexuality #treatmentefficacy #treatmentefficacy-self-reported 

#unfinished-references
