Weyers, S., Gennaro Selvaggi, Stan Monstrey, M. Dhont, R. Van den Broecke, Petra De Sutter, Griet De Cuypere, Guy T'Sjoen, and Piet Hoebeke. "Two-stage versus one-stage sex reassignment surgery in female-to-male transsexual individuals." *Gynecological Surgery* **3** (2006): [link](https://d1wqtxts1xzle7.cloudfront.net/67415977/s10397-006-0203-3-libre.pdf?1621861556=&response-content-disposition=inline%3B+filename%3DTwo_stage_versus_one_stage_sex_reassignm.pdf&Expires=1771970126&Signature=Tmuj-c1VmQL5Vg9ClC-QslWmSxDLQTC6CS-cts7L33uB-uDVA1VfROksqVuUfApjxsxxH0gqgd77CdiYq-Q-vW9lTo3wVFRz-mic5okidQ-A78wwVQIFVEmaul0NqVD8mbPtlSOjwip-oxThV3QiOgkm~r6GZn7NKtAvtQhEjj-c29SXQiIovVZeTXC1sRe4wayHHBZBHcr1qLl9F3ULdb8pzxhTVgfH9BIa1Ix-VHxcgoKUukV724I9KOU5gd84HqGfIlUCXGzIVdlymsm8VwfuMn1OHY6mv1q4dQWy1DX7jNsIGyp4Go4SLZqfpuNhL9i7i1l3lGjd9Tx-IqYJeg__&Key-Pair-Id=APKAJLOHF5GGSLRBV4ZA)
# Two-stage versus one-stage sex reassignment surgery in female-to-male transsexual individuals
## Abstract
- "The objective was to compare the outcome of a combined total hysterectomy-vaginectomy-phalloplasty procedure vs. a vaginectomy-phalloplasty procedure in female-to-male (FTM) gender dysphoric individuals, and to report on a large series of vaginectomies..."
- "This was a retrospective study and the setting was the Gender Team at Ghent University Hospital" in Ghent, Belgium.
- "One hundred and five consecutive cases of vaginectomy-phalloplasty with (one-stage) or without (two-stage) total hysterectomy between 1993 and 2003 were included in the study. Patient files of 69 one-staged and of 36 two-stage procedures were reviewed and analysed. Operation time, the need for transfusions, complications, repeated surgery and hospitalisation time were the main outcome measures."
- "Patients were equally distributed over the study period of 10 years. Comparing the two groups, there was a greater need for transfusion in the group of patients undergoing the one-stage procedure. There was no difference in operation time, rate of major complications or hospitalisation time. One-stage sex reassignment surgery (SRS) in FTM transsexual individuals is associated with more blood loss. However, there is no difference in operative and postoperative complications. Vaginectomy seems to be a safe and relatively simple procedure in FTM transsexual patients."
- "As early as 1984, Milton T. Edgerton pointed out the importance of multidisciplinary teams in the treatment of gender dysphoria."
- "The Ghent Gender Team was founded in 1990 and from the beginning consisted of a coordinating psychiatrist, an endocrinologist, a plastic surgeon, a reconstructive urologic surgeon, and a gynaecological surgeon. Since 1990, we have surgically treated over 500 gender dysphoric patients — during the last 2 years at an average of 60 a year. Within such multidisciplinary teams surgery is preceded by extensive counselling by the psychiatrist and hormonal therapy."
- "In the first years of our experience (1990–1993) we performed an all-in-one surgical intervention: all of the surgical procedures, including the mastectomy, were included in one single operation. This intervention could take up to 10 h of anaesthesia time, which resulted in an increased operative risk and substantial blood loss. A few years later we changed our approach and we performed the subcutaneous mastectomy as a separate first step during the real-life test, because this operation greatly facilitates the adjustment to a male life style. In a second stage, usually 6– 12 months after the mastectomy, the hysterectomy, oopho- rectomy, vaginectomy and phalloplasty were performed. Each of these procedures has its own morbidity and surgical risks, and when combining several steps the risk of morbidity may increase exponentially. Therefore, the question arises if these procedures should all be combined or be performed in separate steps."
- "We conducted a retrospective study comparing the outcome of a combined total hysterectomy-vaginectomy-phalloplasty vs. separate total hysterectomy and vaginectomy-phalloplasty procedures, the hypothesis being that a two-stage approach would lead to less operative morbidity and better surgical outcome."
## Introduction
## Materials and Methods
## Results
## Discussion
## Conclusion
## References
4 Ergeneli, MH, EH Duran, G Ozcan, and M Erdogan. "Vaginectomy and laparoscopically assisted vaginal hysterectomy as adjunctive surgery for female-to-male transsexual reassignment: preliminary report." *European Journal of Obstetrics & Gynecology and Reproductive Biology* **87**, no. 1 (1999), 35-37: [external link to article snippets](https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/abs/pii/S0301211599000913?via%3Dihub)
5 Hage, J.J., F.G. Bouman, F.H. de Graaf, and J.J.A.M. Bloem. *Journal of Urology* **149**, no. 6 (1993), 1463-1468: [external link to article summary](https://www.auajournals.org/doi/10.1016/S0022-5347%2817%2936416-9)
8 Rohrmann, Dorothea and Gerhard Jakse. "Urethroplasty in Female-to-Male Transsexuals." *European Urology* **44**, no. 5 (2003), 611-614: [external link to article snippets](https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/abs/pii/S0302283803003567?via%3Dihub)
9 Fang, R.H., Y.S. Kao, S. Ma, and J.T. Lin. "Phalloplasty in female-to-male transsexuals using free radial osteocutaneous flap: a series of 22 cases." *British Journal of Plastic Surgery* **52**, no. 3 (1999), 217-222: [external link to article summary](https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/abs/pii/S0007122698930272?via%3Dihub)
11 
12 
13 
# Tags
#/2006 #complicationrates #GAS-complications #GAS-hysterectomy #GAS-phalloplasty #GAS-vaginectomy #GennaroSelvaggi #GrietDeCuypere #GynecologicalSurvey #GuyTSjoen #MDhont #PetraDeSutter #PietHoebeke #RVandenBrocke  #SWeyers #StanMonstrey #surgicalcomplications #transgender-Belgium

#unfinished-notes #unfinished-references